FASTER
AND
HIGHER
WAR WEAPONS
Although fighter design philosophy in the mid 1950s increasingly tended
to prioritise the air-to-air-guided missile, the development of guns
continued, and all the Century Series fighters apart from the F-102A
Delta Dagger were equipped with them at some stage of their service
history. For the F-104 and F-105 Thunderchief, the General Electric
M61/M61A-1 Vulcan six-barrel rotary cannon, first tested in 1953, was
integral from the outset.
Offering higher rates of fire and greater accuracy than the standard four
20 mm cannon or six 0.5-in machine guns of the Korean War-vintage
fighters, the M61 and its ammunition container occupied a considerable
space in the slender forward fuselage of the F-104 – the first operational
user of the weapon. A complex two-piece gun mount structure was needed
to absorb the firing loads generated by the gun and stabilise the weapon.
The standard ammunition load for the storage box behind the cockpit
was 725 rounds, or about 100 rounds for range practice. Ammunition
cases were retained but the links were ejected downwards, even if a
Service testing of the AIM-9B centreline store was carried. The system could also be configured to retain
Sidewinder’s compatibility with the both links and cases but this restricted ammunition carriage to 400 rounds
F-104A was performed at NAS China
for the F-104A and 450 for later single-seat versions.
Lake by the US Naval Ordnance Test
Station using three YF-104s that had Lockheed originally specified a pair of 30 mm guns for the aircraft, but
been repaired after accidents and when it was adopted by the Pentagon as Weapons System WS-303A in
then transferred to the US Navy for March 1953, the T171 (later re-designated the M61) Vulcan was included
the tests, flown by pilots from the
instead. It proved to be an extremely accurate weapon, capable of placing
83rd FIS and US Marine Corps. Seven
other USAF F-104As and F-104Ds all of its bullets within a three-foot circle at 1000 ft and 67 rounds
were used to continue the tests. It per second.
was found that Sidewinder launches The Vulcan became the F-104’s primary armament for air superiority, but
at Mach 1.2 were to be avoided as
WS-303A also specified the GAR-8 (later, AIM-9B) Sidewinder 1A missile,
the supersonic shockwave at that
speed tended to rest on the seeker which was intended mainly for use against more distant, non-manoeuvring
head nose, upsetting its coolant targets like bombers. Its 25-lb warhead was the controlled fragmentation
system. Carriage of a missile on only
type, triggered by contact or proximity fusing and capable of projecting
one wing tended to induce a rolling
1500 metal fragments through an inch of aluminium from a detonation
motion, particularly at low speeds to
the extent that formation takeoffs in distance of some 30 ft away. Early Sidewinders, weighing only 155 lbs, had
a one-missile configuration were to be launched from Red Dog wingtip launchers almost directly behind the
banned. F-104A-10-LO 56-0748 later
target, with the launch aircraft not exceeding 2g. They were easily distracted
became a JF-104A for use in the
by other heat sources such as the sun or ground heat, by cloud cover or by
North American X-15 test programme
(USAF) being fired slightly outside the requisite tight range parameters. Launching
at altitude against a large, ‘hot’ target
like a bomber, with a clear sky
background gave a good chance of
success, however.
Weapons were controlled with
the lightweight RCA AN/
ASG-14T1 fire control system,
using a 24-in, pencil-beam radar
antenna and independent optical
and infrared sights. In Search Mode
the radar displayed a range of 20
miles (40 miles in later versions)
and a spiral scan pattern covering a
90-degree cone. 13
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com
