Peace and prosperity in agrarian societies, however, contain the seeds of the troubles to come. The Wheel of Fortune can slow down or speed up, but it never ceases to operate. However, it becomes tedious to read about one secular cycle after another, because with all their variations due to different times, geography, and national character, the basic mechanism is still the same. For this reason, I only hit the highlights of the Principate cycle (27 B.C.- A.D. 284), and then return to the main theme of interest to us—the causes of the decline of Roman asabiya.

INTERNAL PEACE AND ECONOMIC PROSPERITY after 27 B.C. brought about rapid population growth. By A.D. 100, Italy was again suffering from overpopulation. With the resumption of population growth, the Matthew principle began operating with a vengeance. By A.D. 100, the impoverishment of small farmers reached such proportions that the authorities took note. Under the emperor Trajan (A.D. 98-117), they instituted a system of public assistance for freeborn children. This program was prompted by the decline in the numbers of small farmers, especially in central Italy, resulting in a reduction of the numbers of Italian recruits to the legions. Indeed, in the beginning of the first century, Italians supplied two thirds of recruits for the imperial legions, but by the end of the century this proportion fell to below one fourth. Unfortunately, the measures taken by the authorities were completely ineffectual. During the second and third centuries, the proportion of legion recruits from Italy fell to just 3 percent.

At the same time that the smallholder class was disappearing, the core of the Roman Empire—peninsular Italy, including Sicily—was taken over by the latifundia (“large estates”) and villas of the rich. With the cessations of external conquests, the supply of slaves diminished, and the agricultural labor forces became dominated by the coloni, tenants of the great landowners.

A.D. 96 to 180, known as the reigns of the “five good emperors” (Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antonius Pius, and Marcus Aurelius), was the period of internal peace and stability, during which the empire reached and stabilized at its maximum territorial extent. It was also the golden age of the aristocracy. The elites did very well economically and their numbers grew. Social and economic indicators of aristocratic well-being-building activity and marble production, the number of inscriptions and documents, and so on—peaked toward the middle of the second century.
