Contrast this feverish empire-building activity by frontier peoples to the complete absence of such efforts in the non-Roman Europe away from the frontier. We know very little about the northeastern quadrant of Europe, inhabited by Finnish and Baltic peoples, but we can be certain that they lived in small-scale communities. There were no hints of any incipient states there in the first millennium. Interesting developments, with great consequences for the future, began to happen in the wide band of territory located between the frontier zone and the sleepy northeastern quadrant (roughly modern Denmark, northern Germany, Poland, Belarus, and western Ukraine). This territory was not subjected to the direct impact of the Roman frontier, but indirectly it felt its influence (primarily through the trade). No state-building activity occurred here (before the tenth century), but the tribes were on the move. The Saxon pirates terrorized the shores of Britain and Gaul. Soon after the Roman Empire abandoned Britain, bands of Saxons, Jutes, Angles, and Frisians invaded it from the east and south, and began to settle there. In a similar fashion, small but numerous bands of Slavs began pushing south into the Balkan territories of the former Roman Empire, where they settled down as far as southern Greece. Other Slavic tribes expanded in all other compass directions—west, east, and north. All these movements would gradually reshape the ethnic landscape of Europe, but their real impact was starting to be felt only toward the end of the millennium.

Chapter 4

Asabiya in the Desert

Ibn Khaldun Discovers the Key to History

When Ibn Khaldun was 17 years old, the Black Death struck North Africa and carried away both his parents. His full name was Abd-ar-Rahman Abu Zaid ibn Muhammad ibn Khaldun, and he was born in Tunis on May 27, 1332. He belonged to an aristocratic family of statesmen and scholars. Until the early thirteenth century, the Khalduns lived in Seville in Muslim Andalusia. When it became clear that Seville was about to fall to the Christian reconquista, they removed themselves and their wealth from Andalusia to the Maghreb, a region of northwest Africa (modern Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia). Born into extraordinary privilege, Ibn Khaldun led a life of high drama, amazing intellectual creativity, and swashbuckling adventure. During the second half of the 1300s, the Maghreb region was constantly in turmoil resulting from the struggle for supremacy between two dynasties, the Marinids and the Hafsids. Ibn Khaldun’s career mirrored the unsettled times he lived in. He was entertained by kings in palaces and by rats in dungeon cells. Personal misfortune continued to dog him. In the winter of 1384, Ibn Khaldun’s wife and five daughters, sailing from Tunis to join him in Cairo, were lost in a shipwreck. But Ibn Khaldun was not a man to resign himself to despair.
