“Ye nobles are like ravening wolves,” wrote Jacques de Vitry in the thirteenth century. “Therefore shall ye howl in hell ... who despoil your subjects and live on the blood and sweat of the poor.” Whatever a peasant amasses in a year, “the knight, the noble devours in an hour.” De Vitry warned not to take the poor lightly. “If they can aid us, they can also do us harm. You know that many serfs have killed their masters or burned their houses.” De Vitry’s words were prophetic. In 1320, a mass peasant movement called the Pastoureaux (the “Shepherds”) swept the kingdom of France. An unfrocked priest and an apostate monk preaching the crusade to a crowd of peasants was the catalyst. A great army of the rural poor joined by vagabonds and felons marched on Paris, where they liberated the prisoners in the Châtelet and defied the king, who shut himself up in the palace of the Cite. From Paris, they went south toward Saintonge and Aquitaine, storming castles, burning town halls, pillaging the countryside, and slaughtering Jews and lepers. At some point, their numbers reached 40,000, but eventually they broke up in a number of smaller bands. The nobles organized themselves and hunted them down, hanging thousands of the Pastoureaux from trees.

The arrival of the Black Death completed the process of thinning the base of the social pyramid. In general, epidemics always cause a higher mortality among the poor, who suffer from malnutrition, greater crowding, and a lack of bedcare and medicines. In the case of the plague, however, the best way to avoid it was flight. Whereas the urban poor died in droves, the rich had their country estates to escape to, like the young aristocrats in the Decameron who left Florence for a pastoral palace “removed on every side from the roads” with “wells of cool water and vaults of rare wines.” It is generally estimated that the first outbreak of plague in 1348-49 carried away some 40 percent of the English population. Monks who ministered to the dying suffered an even greater mortality. The mortality of tenants-in-chief, on the other hand, was only 27 percent. At the top of the social pyramid, the peers lost barely 8 percent of their number. The only reigning monarch who died from the pestilence was King Alfonso XI of Castile.
