In addition to increasing the internal cohesiveness of the Roman nation, the Gallic frontier also made the job of unifying Italy and eventually the Mediterranean much easier. Other civilized peoples of Italy also feared and detested the Gallic barbarians. Peoples who were directly exposed to the Gallic threat, such as the Etruscans and the Veneti, joined the growing Roman Empire essentially voluntarily. Until 390, the Romans and the Etruscans were almost constantly at war, but after they both found themselves on the Gallic frontier, these wars ceased. In fact, as discussed previously, an Etruscan city of Clusium, when threatened by the Sennones, appealed to Rome for protection, even though there was no preexisting defensive treaty. The Veneti, who were the most exposed to the Gallic pressure, proved to be the staunchest Roman allies. Even during the darkest hour of the Hannibalic war, when Rome was abandoned by many of her allies, the Veneti loyally soldiered on. To a lesser degree, the same logic applied to other Italian peoples who were in a more-protected situation in southern Italy. They undoubtedly would have preferred to keep their independence, but when given a choice between whom to submit to—civilizational aliens (Gallic hordes and other foreign troops lead by a Semitic general) or civilizationally more familiar Rome—they eventually opted for Rome. This was one of the main reasons why the Romans prevailed in the Second Punic War.

Polybius describes integrative effect of the Gallic threat. On learning that a Gallic invasion was imminent, the Roman authorities began to enroll the legions and summon the Italian allies. “Help was readily provided on all sides, for the other inhabitants of Italy were so terror-stricken by the invasion of the Gauls that they no longer thought of themselves as allies of Rome, nor regarded this as a war to uphold the Roman hegemony. On the contrary, every people saw the danger as one which threatened themselves and their own city and territory. For this reason they responded to the orders from Rome without a moment’s hesitation.”
