The settlers themselves were certainly no shrinking violets, and often conducted themselves in a manner as merciless as that shown by their adversaries. During the Powhattan War, Governor Wyatt invited several hundred Indians to a peace conference, where he attempted to poison them all. About 200 became violently ill and were slaughtered by the Virginians, the rest (including the Indian leader) escaped. During King Philip’s War, the Puritans conducted wholesale massacres of noncombatants. When they captured the wife and nine-year old son of King Philip (the leader of the Indian forces), they sold them and hundreds of other captives into slavery. The Dutch also perpetrated their share of atrocities. In 1643, the Dutch soldiers attacked a village of Wappinger Indians, situated near the site of present-day Albany. The village had already endured a raid of the Mohawks, who killed and enslaved many males but spared the women and children. The Dutch slaughtered all remaining inhabitants, including women and children. They returned to New Amsterdam with the severed heads of 80 Indians, to be used in a grisly game of football on the streets of the town. In addition, 30 prisoners were tortured to death for public amusement.

These are just a few of the stories out of many illustrating the extraordinary intensity of the Indian-settler conflict in North America. A recent compilation counted more than 16,000 recorded atrocities committed by the Whites on the Indians, the Indians on the Whites, and the Indians on other Indians during the 268 years of conflict. This works out to an average of more than one atrocity a week! Actually, there were many more, because not every incident left a historical record. The impact of these incidents on the settler community when they were reported in newspapers (such as the torture story described in Benjamin Franklin’s newspaper) and books (such as Mary Rowlandson’s bestseller) was much greater than it would be in a preliterate society. It is hard for us to envisage the psychological impact that the continuing barrage of such reports would have on the collective psyche of the settler population. Imagine hearing on CNN that yesterday yet another American town was wiped out by the “Reds.” (Let’s leave the precise identity of the enemy unspecified.) All men were killed, women raped and then also slain, and those children who were not slaughtered immediately were instead carried away to be sold on the organ black market. Or that the Reds again tortured a U.S. serviceman to death, videotaped it, and showed it repeatedly on the Al Reddiyyah channel. Or perhaps an interview with a ransomed captive about her horrible experiences at the hands of the Reds. You would hear a story of this kind once a week throughout your life; and the same state of affairs was in place when your parents and grandparents grew up. Without doubt, any society subjected to such pressures for generations would be transformed.
