The most interesting is the zone of contact between “civilization” and “barbarism” in Europe. It runs along the Mediterranean shore in southeastern Iberia, south France, central Italy, and northern Greece (see Map 5). This zone is a typical metaethnic frontier, where two very different kinds of people come in contact and conflict. The metaethnic frontier theory predicts that new aggressive empires should originate from this contact zone. Indeed, the three “great powers” of the Mediterranean in the next two centuries will be Carthage, Macedon, and Rome. By the end of the first century B.C., one of them, Rome, will have defeated its rivals and unified the whole Mediterranean for the first (and last) time. This chapter traces the rise of Rome, from the modest beginnings in the seventh century B.C. to its peak of power in the second century A.D. Understanding the specific case of Rome is a critical test of the metaethnic frontier theory, its ability to explain the rise of imperial nations in general, as well as how their rise to power carries within it the seeds of their inevitable downfall.

ONE DISTINCTIVE FEATURE OF ROME was that it experienced not one, but two distinct frontiers, one after another. The geography of Italy and the kinds of peoples who inhabited it in the early Iron Age explain much about Rome’s formation. The flatlands of Italy suited to intensive agriculture are divided by the Apennines into three distinct areas: the Po Valley in the north, the Tyrrhenian Italy (lying between the Tyrrhenian Sea and the mountains) in the center, and the “heel and toe” of the Italian boot in the south. By the eight century B.C., the Tyrrhenian Italy was divided between the Etruscans in the north and speakers of various Italic languages, including Latin, in the south. The origins of the Etruscans remain one of the unsolved historical puzzles. We know that they spoke a non-Indo-European language and that their religion and culture were distinct from the Latins and other Italic tribes. (Italic languages belong to the Indo-European family.) Also in the eighth century B.C., Greeks were beginning to colonize southern Italy. They and Phoenician traders were spreading an urban and literate culture into the central Mediterranean; Etruscans were eager to adopt it. As far as we know, the Etruscans were never unified under a single central authority, but instead operated as a loosely confederated league of “12 cities,” united by common language and a shared religious cult. In the seventh century, the Etruscans dominated central Italy and expanded north into the Po Valley. They also established colonies on the coast of Sardinia and in Campania, where they competed and fought with the Greeks.
