Before the 1990s, even a person living in the relative communication freedom of the U.S. had little alternative to the American mass media. Today, all the major newspapers in the world have Web sites, and one’s ability to get news and opinion is limited only by the number of languages one can read. Actually, many non-English language news providers now post English translations of their texts on the Web. A Chinese view can be garnered from the People’s Daily, an Arab view from the Cairo weekly Al Ahram. As anybody who has routinely read newspapers in two different countries knows, the range of opinions, and even of events deemed important to be reported, that one can get from the mass media of a single country is blinkered. This is apparent even when comparing, say, the American and French presses—although both countries are part of the same Western civilization.

But the Internet has done more than just broaden the spectrum of news sources. The truly revolutionary change is that the Internet is beginning to blur the difference between news providers and news consumers. One group of new players in the information space are the “bloggers” (from Web log, which was shortened to blog). It is relatively easy for an individual to set up his or her own Web site, and periodically post on it interesting news items, gleaned from other sources, links to interesting sites (including other bloggers), and personal commentary on, for example, politics and violence in the Muslim world. One blog is titled “Friends of Democracy: Ground-level views from the people and bloggers of Iraq,” another “Jihad Watch,” and another “Global Guerrillas: Networked tribes, infrastructure disruption, and the emerging bazaar of violence.” There were millions of such bloggers in the U.S. alone in 2004, and their numbers have been growing exponentially, doubling every half a year. Collectively, they are known as the blogosphere.

In a remarkable test of strength, the blogosphere challenged a news report, run by a mainstream television channel during the 2004 presidential election. Dan Rather, now former anchor of CBS News, presented allegations on 60 Minutes that friends in high places had ushered young George W. Bush into the Texas Air National Guard in 1968, as his way of evading military service in Vietnam. Four memos, supposedly written by Lt. Col. Jerry Killian in 1972-73, substantiated the allegations. In these memos, Killian expressed frustration that then-subordinate Lt. Bush was shirking his guard obligations. Killian purportedly complained that he was under pressure to “sugarcoat” Bush’s record. The day after the broadcast many newspapers, including the New York Times, followed up on the story.
