Whereas military pressure is a “push” factor, obliterating the weak and further strengthening the strong, a source of prestige goods is a “pull” factor. Its effect, however, is the same: to increase the selective pressure for increased military strength. The Germans could obtain prestige goods from the Roman Empire by raiding, trading, or subsidies (rewards for good behavior). Raiding was an increasingly feasible option beginning in the third century, as the Roman Empire started declining. Even then, only very large tribal confederations had any chance at securing a significant amount of booty. Trading was a peaceful way to obtain goods, but it also led to increased conflict. Tribes that controlled the cross-frontier trade (because they were better situated on the frontier, or perhaps secured a trading agreement with the Romans) were resented by those who were cut off from directly dealing with the Roman traders. The obvious remedy was to defeat and displace the lucky intermediaries. Imperial subsidies caused conflict by the same logic. As a result, both push and pull factors worked to establish a highly conflict-prone band of territory extending 100 miles from the frontier in both directions. Within this band, it was a “dog-eat-dog” morality, and the strong dogs became even stronger as they ate the small ones.

The frontier also exerted more subtle influences on the Germanic societies. The Empire was not only the source of prestige goods, but also of ideas, techniques, and other kinds of cultural elements. Recollect the comment of Tacitus about how rapidly the Germans learned from the Romans the value of discipline. By the time the Franks began expanding into the Roman territory in the fifth century, they already realized the value of records and bureaucracy, so they employed the Roman administrators and accepted them as members of the nascent imperial aristocracy.

It is interesting that the Romans sometimes inadvertently helped the process that eventually resulted in their succumbing to the Germanic conquest. Roman frontier administrators encouraged several small tribes to band together under one leader. It was much simpler to control (by gifts or intimidation) one “kinglet” than a bunch of chieftains or, worse, to deal with many tribal councils. The side effect of this policy, however, was to acculturate the Germans to the institution of kingship, with dire consequences for the later empire. Another mechanism that inadvertently promoted cooperation among Germanic chieftains was their frequent meetings with each other in the capitals of frontier provinces, such as Cologne, Mainz, or Augsburg.
