Thus, Muhammad was able to take a multitude of tribes, each internally solidary but unable to work together, and forge them into a meta-tribe, the umma. In the process, the former tribesmen, now Muslims, transferred their identity and allegiance to the new supra-tribal level of political organization. The new cohesion enabled the Muslims to prevail over their enemies. Between 622 and 630, when Muhammad was the ruler of only a small oasis community of Medina, the Muslims were much weaker than their chief enemies, the Meccans. For example, at the battle of the Trench (627), 10,000 Meccan troops confronted 3,000 Muslims. Muslims were also constantly suffering from the shortage of military equipment such as armor, and particularly horses for cavalry. Nevertheless, they prevailed, and in 630 Mecca capitulated and was annexed to Muhammad’s incipient Islamic Empire. The Meccans lost because they confronted Muhammad with the typical loose tribal federation, made up of tribesmen with intense loyalty only to their own clan. As a result, a member tribe could decide not to join battle at a critical juncture, or even be bought over to the other side. By contrast, for Muslims tribal origin did not matter. Of paramount importance was belonging to the single Islamic commune, the umma. Toward the end of Muhammad’s career, he could put a tribal cavalry unit under the command of a lieutenant, who was not a member of the tribe he commanded—something that was unthinkable in a traditional tribal confederation.

The remarkable discipline of the new Islamic army is illustrated by the last episode in the struggle between the Muslims and the Meccans. In 630, Muhammad unexpectedly appeared in front of Mecca with a large army. It was clear to the Meccans that they had a very little chance of resisting the Prophet. They attempted to negotiate, but Muhammad only promised the envoys that all those who stayed within their houses would be spared. On the next day, Muhammad’s troops entered Mecca in four columns from all directions simultaneously. Only one column encountered resistance from some die-hard anti-Muhammad forces, which was speedily suppressed. Not a single house was broken into, and no Meccan was assaulted. Somebody stole the silver necklace of the sister of Abu Bakr (who later was to become the first caliph), but this happened because she left the house with her father to watch Muhammad’s entrance into Mecca. No pillage occurred. Muhammad’s order against entering Meccan houses was carried out to the letter. This degree of obedience is particularly remarkable given the origins of Muhammad’s army—robbing strangers was always part of the Bedouin’s lifestyle.
