Unlike the E.U., China fits the definition of empire perfectly. Its conquest of Tibet and willingness to indefinitely suppress Uigur separatism in Xinjang suggest no aversion to the use of force. Having regained Hong Kong, the Chinese are now bending all their efforts to bringing Taiwan into the fold. It also seems that the Chinese are currently extending their economic influence all over the globe—buying ore from Australia and oil from Sudan and Venezuela. China has begun throwing its considerable weight around in ASEAN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. North Korea is essentially a client state of China.

Between 1978, when the Chinese leadership began implementing economic reforms, and 2003, China has quadrupled its gross domestic product and is now the second largest economy in the world (measured on a purchasing power parity basis). If China can maintain economic growth at the same rate for another decade, it will surpass the U.S. and become the largest world economy. Economic power inevitably brings in its wake political and military power. If current trends continue, China will become the next world hegemon—a prospect that must be of concern to the American political and military establishment.

Then there is the core state of the former Soviet Empire, Russia—down but perhaps not yet out. The place to watch as an indicator of what will happen to Russia as a great power is Chechnya.

In 1996, after two years of conflict, Russia signed a peace treaty with the Chechen separatists. The so-called Khasavyurt Agreement was essentially an admission of Russian defeat that gave Chechnya de-facto independence. The Russians were sick and tired of the conflict, and basically wished Chechnya and the Chechens to go away and leave them alone. However, internal developments within Chechnya made such a course of events impossible. First, the victors started fighting among themselves. The nationalist faction lost to the Islamists, who included many Al Qaida immigrants from outside Chechnya, such as the notorious Jordanian war-lord Khattab. Later, after the second war began, several nationalist leaders went over to the Russian side. Islamists were primarily interested in Chechnya as a bridgehead for building an Islamic caliphate that would stretch from the Black to Caspian Sea and up to the Middle Volga.
