From the farmers’ point of view, the nomads were the devil horsemen, uncivilized and unlettered barbarians, murderers, slavers, and despoilers. The antagonism between the farmer and the herder goes back to the very beginnings of human history, as exemplified by the biblical parable about the conflict between Cain with his fields and Abel with his flocks. (Because the early Hebrews were herders, naturally the evil guy in the story was Cain.) In eastern Europe, from the tenth century on, the cultural chasm was further deepened by the tendency of the settled cultivators to adopt Christianity opposed by the inclination of the nomads to Islam. The most frequent terms describing the steppe nomads in the Russian chronicles, such as the godless or the pagans, reflected this religious boundary. Incidentally, in the modern Russian language, the word pagan has lost its original religious meaning and now just means “bad” or “evil.” As discussed in the preceding chapter, the religious aspect of the conflict between the Russians and the Tatars is evident in the language used by the Stroganov Chronicle in its description of battles between Ermak’s Cossacks and the Siberian Tatars.

The climatic and ecological boundary between the steppe and forest anchored a significant fault line between two very different civilizations. The interactions across the fault line were shaped by two basic facts of steppe life. First, the nomads had an abundance of animal products, but a scarcity of plant products. And man cannot live on meat alone. Second, their martial skills were strong. Riding and archery were highly developed due to daily practice while following the herds and protecting them against predators, and so the nomads enjoyed a substantial military advantage over the settled people. The need of the nomads for grain and their greater ability to take it by force could not help but create antagonistic relations between them and the farmers. This fact does not mean that herder-farmer interactions were uniformly bellicose. Under certain conditions, the nomads could get what they needed by peaceful trading (especially if the farmers were protected by a strong state). The dealings between the agrarian and nomadic civilizations took a variety of forms. Some intermarriage even occurred, usually at the aristocratic level.
