The contemporaries perceived clearly the onset of Rome’s imperiopathosis, listed its symptoms, and provided a diagnosis. In fact, Sallust’s diagnosis is not too far from the explanation of Rome’s decline offered by cliodynamics. The first part of the diagnosis, the removal of the external enemy, is basically correct. However, as we saw in an earlier chapter, the external enemy, the struggle with whom forged Roman nation, was the Gauls. There is no question that the Carthaginians added significant pressure to the metaethnic cauldron from which Rome arose, especially during the Second Punic War (although even during that conflict, the majority of Hannibal’s army were the Gauls). But the Carthaginians, even though speaking a Semitic language and worshipping a somewhat different pantheon, were still part of the same Mediterranean civilization to which the Romans also belonged. It is doubtful that Rome would rise as a world empire if it were only subjected to the pressure form Carthage. Here is where a general and empirically grounded theory becomes invaluable. Because all world empires arose from metaethnic frontiers (so far as we know), the key factor in the rise of Rome must have been its metaethnic frontier with the barbarian Gauls. The pushing away of this frontier, which occurred when Cisapline Gaul was definitively conquered in the early second century B.C., was thus the first precondition of the ensuing decline.

The second part of Sallust’s diagnosis needs greater modification. The ancients were fond of inveighing against the “enervating” effect of luxury. Now luxury has two components, one physical—creature comforts—and the other social—conspicuous consumption. It is clear that the first aspect of luxury, personal comfort, should have no effect on the collective solidarity. For example, the wealthy Romans spent even more money on beautifying their dwellings than on the banquets. They constructed private baths, complete with warm, hot, and cold pools, and lavished money on formal gardens. Why should baths and gardens be “enervating”? One could actually argue the opposite, by pointing to the health benefits of such “luxuries.” Why should cultivating asparagus—a monstrous piece of gluttony, according to Pliny—soften the moral fiber of the Roman aristocracy?

If we redefine “luxury” as conspicuous consumption, however, the argument begins to make much more sense. The main point of conspicuous consumption is to signal to others high status, power, or wealth. Thus, having a hot bath at home is not conspicuous consumption today in the United States, because pretty much anybody can afford it. But a private bath in the republican Rome was most certainly a form of conspicuous consumption, because only the wealthiest could afford it. A modern visitor is struck by the opulence of private baths in Roman villas adorned with the elaborate and beautiful mosaics. It was not just about soaking in hot water, it was a social statement.
