Cultural evolution is faster than genetic also because it does not need generations to unfold. Looking again at the Roman frontier, we can see the cultural group selection in action in the rise and fall of charismatic leaders and their retinues, such as Arminius or Maroboduus. Through a process akin to mutation and recombination in genetics, each new warrior group will adopt somewhat different ways of organization and its members will internalize different norms. In the frontier situation, where the pressure of group selection is particularly heavy, groups will rapidly arise and dissolve. Only the most successful ones, those that hit by chance or design on the most advantageous combination of cultural elements, will survive. The cultural elements in question are not only those related to fighting prowess. Military bands that did not treat their women well never became functioning societies, and did not perpetuate themselves.

WHEN HUMANS EVOLVED THE ABILITY to cooperate with unrelated individuals, they relied on face-to-face interactions and memory to distinguish friends and acquaintances from the enemies or untrustworthy individuals in the group. There must have been an intense selection pressure for what science writer Malcolm Gladwell calls the “social channel capacity,” the ability to handle the complexities of living in large social groups. After all, to ensure cooperation you need to remember not only what each group member did to you, but also what they all did to each other. If Mary cheated Jane, she might also cheat you. When Bob fell asleep on guard duty, but John did not shun him, as he was supposed to do, it means John is failing to cooperate in a collective sanctioning task. Making a society work is a complicated business.
