The area of primary interest to us is the region between the rivers Elbe and Oder, which closely corresponds to what was until recently East Germany. During the Roman times, Germanic tribes inhabited this region. During the period of the great migrations after the collapse of the western Roman Empire, however, the Germans abandoned East Germany and were replaced with western Slavs, whom the Germans called the Wends. Historians do not completely understand why this happened. Most likely, local Germanic tribes were weakened when their most active elements migrated toward the former Roman lands, attracted by the opportunities of booty and rich agricultural lands to settle on. At the same time, the Slavic people began their expansion from wherever their homeland was. (The authorities continue to wrangle over this question.) When German tribes, who stayed home, came under stiff raiding pressure from the Slavs expanding westward, they probably decided to join their relatives in warmer and safer climes. This Slavic “drive to the west” started during the fifth or sixth century. By the end of the eight century, the border between the Germanic Saxons and Slavic Wends was located along the Elbe. When Charlemagne conquered the Saxons in 785 and converted them en mass to Christianity, the Elbe frontier became a metaethnic fault line.

The German eastward drive occurred in fits and starts, and took centuries to complete. There was a tentative thrust under Charlemagne, which did not amount to anything. When the Carolingian Empire collapsed, the Saxon lands came under stiff raiding pressure from the Wends. Effective resistance against the raids could be organized only in the beginning of the tenth century under the new Ottonian emperors. The Elbe and Weser valleys in Saxony and Thuringia were fortified. Towns, villas, and monasteries were palisaded and garrisoned. After their heartland was protected, the Saxons went on the offensive against the Wends. In 928, they crossed the frozen Havel River and stormed Branibor (Brandenburg). Several years later, the emperor Henry I destroyed a large Slav army at the battle of Lenzen. During the subsequent decades, the Saxon emperors divided East Germany into marks and established several bishoprics under the new archbishopric of Magdeburg to convert the Slavs. However, in 983, a Slav uprising destroyed most of the Saxon gains east of Elbe. The problem was that the emperors were more interested in expanding their influence in Italy than in subduing the wilderness of East Germany, and the marcher lords were not strong enough to make headway against the Wends on their own. For the next century and a half, the Drang nach Osten ground to a halt.
