The “wind-swept tree” is the world tree, Yggdrasil. During his nine-day ordeal, Odin learned rune magic; later he sacrificed an eye to drink from the Well of Mimir, which bestowed great knowledge. These experiences transformed a minor deity into the god of war, death, wisdom, and magic, and the chief among the gods. Although interesting parallels exist between the ordeal of Odin and the passion of the Christ, it is difficult to imagine two more different religions than Christianity and the cult of Odin. Jesus of Nazareth sacrificed himself to save humanity, whereas Odin sought wisdom and power for himself. Odin’s message was not one of mercy or hope. Human sacrifices were frequently offered to Odin, especially prisoners taken in battle. The skalds (poets) called Odin the “God of Hanged Men” or the “Lord of Gallows,” because the usual method of sacrifice was hanging the victim on a tree. The eleventh-century historian Adam of Bremen recounts that in the sacred grove in Uppsala, Sweden, many human bodies hung from the branches of the sacred trees.

Odin thrived on war, and could even cause one where none existed. He was a dour, merciless, and deceitful god. Odin was destined to die at Ragnarok, the last battle between the gods and the giants. Even knowing his doom, Odin nevertheless prepared for Ragnarok by gathering to himself the souls of heroes slain in battle. Awaiting the final battle, the heroes whiled their time away at Odin’s hall, Valhalla, by alternatively feasting and fighting each other to the death. Valhalla was the idealized version of the lifestyle of real Germanic warriors.

The cult of Odin was suited to the violent, unsettled, and treacherous conditions that existed in the Rhineland. Survival required banding together with trusted comrades to follow a war leader who could deliver an assured victory. The development of the new institution of sacral kingship, thus, paralleled the growth of the cult of Odin. The new warlords worshipped Odin as the giver of victory on the battlefield, and legitimated their political power by claiming direct descent from him. For example, all Anglo-Saxon royal lines claimed direct descent from Odin.

To recapitulate, when they first came in direct contact in the first century B.C., the religions of the Romans and the Germans were not widely dissimilar variations on the basic Indo-European theme. By A.D. 400, however, the cultural divide deepened into a chasm between civilizations. The two religions stood in sharp ideological opposition to each other. Both provided symbolic “markers” for delineating “us” versus “them.” The cult of Odin, additionally, legitimated the military and political power of the Germanic sacral kings, solidifying previously loose tribal confederations into highly cohesive warrior nations. The frontier between the Romans and the Germans, thus, became a major fault line, similar in its intensity to the Russian-Tatar and American settler-Indian frontiers.
