The collapse of order brings in its wake the four horsemen of apocalypse—famine, war, pestilence, and death. Population declines, and wages increase, while rents decrease. As incomes of commoners recover, the fortunes of the upper classes hit the bottom. Economic distress of the elites and lack of effective government feed the continuing internecine wars. But civil wars thin the ranks of the elites. Some die in factional fighting, others succumb to feuds with neighbors, and many just give up on trying to maintain their noble status and quietly slip into the ranks of commoners. Intra-elite competition subsides, allowing order to be restored. Stability and internal peace bring prosperity, and another secular cycle begins. “So peace brings warre and warre brings peace.”

Empires, therefore, go through an alternation of roughly century-long integrative and disintegrative phases as a result of their inner workings. But this does not mean that external factors are unimportant—as noted previously, although they do not cause secular cycles, they can influence them. Suppose that the population has already grown to the point where all potentially cultivable lands are cultivated, so that the capacity of land to feed the people is already under strain. A global cooling of the climate, causing a decline in crop production, will tip the society over the edge of sustainability. The resulting population decline will mainly affect the lower classes, making for a top-heavy society and that, as we know, rapidly leads to increasing social instability and collapse. If not for the temperature change, this society would enjoy internal peace for a while longer (although disintegration phase cannot be postponed forever).

In this theoretical example, the onset of instability was still due to internal causes (elite-commoner balance getting out of whack, causing intense intra-elite competition, and so on), but the timing of collapse was advanced by inclement climate. Again, external factors do not explain the secular cycle, but can influence it. Suppose the global cooling occurs earlier, when the population is sparse, and there is plenty of uncultivated land. A decline in crop productivity will impose some hardship, because peasants will need to increase the amount of land they cultivate to make up for poorer harvests. Perhaps population growth will be slower because of harsh winters. But there will be no population decline, no elite-commoner disbalance, and stability will be preserved. Climate worsening, thus, may or may not bring about the society collapse, depending on what stage of the cycle the society is in when it hits. This is why no strong association exists between climatic change and decentralization phases.
