What social forces could bring about the decrease in inequality? Perhaps we can answer this question by tracing the social and economic trends in England after the population peak c. 1300. As we have seen, the fourteenth century was a period of catastrophic mortality and population decline. By 1400, half of the population was gone. Population decline dramatically lowered the peasant-land ratio. Suddenly, there were not enough hands to work the land. The laws of economics decreed that wages should go up. The English parliament, dominated by landowners, passed legislation requiring workers to accept the same wages as were current before 1349, but this law (unlike the law of supply and demand) was completely ineffectual.

Not only did the wages go up, but the problem of landlessness was greatly alleviated by the plague. Formerly poor peasants inherited land when richer relatives died or married widows with land. They also now could rent the land from the gentry at very cheap rates. What happened was that when the aftershocks of the bubonic plague died out, fewer people meant lower demand for grain, and grain prices declined. Squeezed between higher wages and collapsing grain prices, the lords saw their prof its from direct management of the demesne evaporate. As they despaired of trying to make a profit, they gradually abandoned direct cultivation with hired labor and began letting the land out to peasants. Because land was in abundance, they could often get only nominal rents, but it was better than nothing.

For more than a century after the Black Death, population numbers in England stayed low, and the economic conditions continued to favor peasants. Unlike their forebears in the decades around 1300, fifteenth-century peasants drank as much ale as they wanted. They ate a lot of meat (mainly pork and mutton), cheese, and fish (during Lent). They wore new, if homemade, clothing, sometimes made from the wool of their own sheep.

In the fifteenth century, a stonemason in London earned twice as much as a century before, but the price of food was less. In real terms, worker incomes tripled. Life of commoners in fifteenth-century England was not by any means idyllic, because there was too much death. People died from the recurrent bouts of epidemic, from robbing brigands and murderous knights, from childbirth (women), and alehouse brawls (men). But for those who survived, life was much, much better than a century earlier.

This great reduction of poverty was one of the factors ensuring that economic inequality was much diminished in the fifteenth century. At the same time that the numbers of destitute declined, the super rich also started disappearing, although this process took most of the fifteenth, and part of the sixteenth century. How did this happen?
