The Romans used the collective name the Germans for all nonstate peoples living east of the Rhine, but the Germans themselves did not think of themselves as a single people. Their ethnic identity instead centered on smaller tribal units, such as the Cherusci, the Chatti, the Bructeri, the Sugambri, and so on. A tribe united many villages and farms. Larger tribes could field armies consisting of a few thousand warriors. Each tribe was governed by an assembly of free adult men, called the “Thing,” which met regularly to make decisions for the tribe. The German society, however, was not egalitarian—individuals belonging to noble lineages had more power and wealth than the commoners. As the Roman historian Cornelius Tacitus wrote in his treatise on the Germans, “The leading men take counsel over minor issues, the major ones involve them all; yet even these decisions that lie with the commons are considered in advance by the elite.” At times of war, the tribal council designated a war leader, usually a member of one of the noble lineages, who had distinguished himself in previous battles and shown leadership qualities. The war leader had considerable authority in wartime, but relinquished political power after the war was over. Another kind of leader, called the thiudans, served largely a religious role. The thiudans was associated with the god Tiwaz, the head of the German pantheon (before the rise of Odin, as discussed later in this chapter). Tiwaz was a typical Indo-European Skyfather (equivalent to Zeus in the Greek mythology), the god of creation, order, justice, and the natural cycles of the world. He was also the god of the Thing, and in addition to their other religious duties, the thiudans presided at assemblies.

The Romans used the same term rex (“king”) for both military and religious leaders of the Germans. However, neither type had the permanent and extensive powers of the monarchs we find among them a few centuries later. Tacitus noted that “the king or a leading man is given a hearing, more through his influence in persuasion than his power in command.”
