At the age of 20, the Spartan youths made the transition to adulthood by trying to get elected to one of the dining fraternities, a “mess,” to which all Spartan citizens belonged. To fail to win election to a mess meant becoming a social outcast. Members of the mess ate all their meals communally, and each man had to contribute a fixed amount of barley, wine, cheese, and figs every month. Although their status had changed, the state’s regulation of their life did not. “Their training continued right into manhood, for nobody was free to live as he wished, but the city was like a military camp, and they had a set way of life and routine in the public service. They were fully convinced that they were the property not of themselves but of the state. If they had no other duty assigned to them, they used to watch the boys, either teaching them something useful, or learning themselves from seniors. For indeed one of the fine and enviable things which Lykourgos achieved for his citizens was a great deal of leisure. He forbade them to practice any manual trade at all. There was no need for the troublesome business and efforts of making money, since wealth had become completely without envy and prestige. The helots worked their land for them, supplying the fixed amount of produce.”

Their rigorous upbringing and discipline made the Spartans into unbeatable soldiers. Sparta did not lose a single battle between 800 and 371 B.C. In fact, their training was so severe that war was treated as a vacation. “In times of battles, the officers relaxed the harshest aspects of their discipline ... They also had less rigorous exercises, and they allowed the young men a regime in other respects less restricted and supervised, so that for them alone war was a rest from the preparation for war ... It was an impressive and frightening sight to see them advancing in time to the flute and leaving no space in the battle line, with no nervousness in their minds, but calmly and cheerfully moving into the dangerous battle to the sound of music. For men in this frame of mind are unlikely to suffer from fear or excessive excitement, but rather to be steady in their purpose and confident and brave as if their gods were there with them.”
