But this explanation cannot be correct. Seas are not always moats; they can also unite. The Roman Empire unified three of the peninsulas that Diamond mentions, plus Britain, Anatolia, the rest of the Mediterranean, and half of continental Europe. The Mediterranean Sea knitted together the Roman Empire, instead of isolating its provinces from each other. People are divided by mountain chains, not by internal seas and narrow straights. China has more mountainous terrain than Europe. (Those Chinese landscape paintings are not fantasies!) By contrast, Europe has a broad plain running all the way from Aquitaine through Germany, Poland, Belarus and Ukraine, to Russia. This huge plain offers no significant barriers to expansion. History shows that life there was always precarious—just look at how often the capitals located on the plain have been overrun by enemies. Moscow was destroyed by the Mongols, occupied by the Poles, burnt by the Tatars and the French of Napoleon, and came within a hair of falling to Nazi Germany in 1941. Paris was occupied by the Russians at the end of the Napoleonic wars, and captured twice by the Germans since then. Berlin was captured and burned by the Russians during the Seven Year War, and again stormed in 1945. But the most graphic example of how precarious existence can be on the North European Plain is Poland—dismembered in three stages by Prussia, Russia, and Austria in the eighteenth century, then once again divided between Germany and Soviet Union in 1939. There must be some other reason than geography that would explain why these conquests never took, why the North European Plain was never unified since the days of Charlemagne.

In fact, it is not Europe that is exceptional, it is China. No other region in the world has had such a long history of imperial rule. Perversely enough, the reason, ultimately, is geographic or, more precisely, ecological. The distribution of rainfall within eastern Asia creates a sharp ecological boundary between the drier steppe and wetter agricultural regions. Ever since humans learned predatory nomadism, this ecological boundary coincided with a metaethnic frontier between nomadic pastoralists and settled agriculturalists. Under pressure from the steppe, Chinese agriculturalists built one empire after another. On the steppe side, the nomads united in one imperial confederation after another. The Chinese made forays into the nomad territory, but never could make it their own, because they could not grow crops there. Nomads repeatedly conquered China, but in the process assimilated and merged into the Chinese. The fault line between the Chinese and nomadic civilizations was anchored by the geography of eastern Asia. That is why one universal empire repeatedly followed another in China. A universal empire is a state that unifies all, or virtually all, of a civilization.
