Devotion, thus, was a kind of suicide bombing. Not on the model of the Japanese kamikaze pilot in the Second World War but rather the modern Islamic fundamentalist. The effect was intended to be primarily psychic, rather than physical. The main goal of modern suicide bombers, after all, is much more than the destruction of those specific unfortunates caught in the actual blast. The effect on the Roman troops of such acts of selfless sacrifice was electrifying, while the enemy army became dismayed and prone to losing its will to fight. To resume Livy’s narrative: “From then on, the battle hardly seemed to depend on human effort. The Romans, after losing their general (which on other occasions is generally a cause for alarm), checked their flight and wanted to renew the fighting; the Gauls, especially those crowding round the body of the consul, kept throwing their javelins without aim or purpose, as if they had lost their wits, while some of them were stupefied and could think of neither fighting or flight. But on the Roman side, the pontiff [chief priest] Livius ... cried out that the Romans had won the day, now that they were freed by the consul’s fate. The Gauls and Samnites now belonged to Mother Earth and the gods of the underworld; Decius was carrying off the army he had devoted [that is, the Gauls and Samnites], calling on it to follow him, and on the enemy’s side all was madness and terror.”

VERTICAL INTEGRATION OF A SOCIETY, the degree of solidarity felt between the commons and aristocracy, is one of the most important characteristics explaining its success at empire building. To investigate how Rome stacked up on this score, we need to understand its social structure, which was intimately connected to Rome’s military organization. It was no accident that the original meaning of the Latin word “people”—populus—was “army.” The bulk of the Roman citizen population were small landowners working their own land. Their great importance to the Roman state was that they supplied the recruits to the legions. Citizens with property valued at 50,000 to 100,000 asses (an as was a bronze coin; during this period Romans did not use silver or gold coinage) served as hoplites—infantrymen armed with helmet, shield, spear, and sword. These heavily armed infantrymen were the mainstay of ancient Mediterranean armies, and are familiar to us from many Greek depictions. Poorer citizens with property valued at 11,000 to 25,000 asses served as light infantrymen (armed with a sling or javelin). At the bottom of the social scale were those who did not serve—propertyless citizens (proletarii), foreigners, and slaves.
