The only recourse was to borrow money from his wealthier neighbor, a Mr. Harcomb, using his land as collateral. Unfortunately, no matter what the Atwoods did, the debt never went away; it just kept getting bigger and bigger. When Jack’s father died, the lord took as heriot (death duty) their only bull, which they used for plowing. The parish priest was entitled to the next-best beast, and took the pig. There was not enough money to pay off the debt to the Harcombs, and they took possession of most of the Atwood land, leaving the heirs with a cottage and a small plot that was only good for growing kitchen vegetables.

Being the only child in the family, Grandfather Harcomb inherited the whole 30 acres. This amount of land allowed him to make a cash surplus in a normal year. He also had the luck of being appointed as the village headman, which provided him with extra opportunities to buy an acre here and there. His only son, Matthew’s father, inherited 35 acres of land. Matthew’s father was the neighbor who loaned money to Jack’s father, so when the latter died, the Harcomb’s lands were augmented by an additional 5 acres. Matthew inherited the whole Harcomb land and married the sole daughter of another substantial peasant in the village, who brought in a handsome dowry. He now had more than 50 acres of land, which he could not work all by himself.

But in the early fourteenth century, there was plenty of surplus labor in the village, and they could be hired at quite reasonable wages from Matthew’s point of view. Over the last several generations, grain prices kept climbing, and Matthew was making big profits from managing his land. Like his father, he invested a portion of his gains into purchasing more land. He could also build himself a larger house, begin drinking expensive wine imported from Bordeaux (other villagers drank beer), and wear new and colorful clothes (instead of wearing homespun like everybody else). The Harcombs and the Atwoods both started as middling peasant families, but after three generations they were rapidly drifting into different social classes.

While Matthew Harcomb was plotting about how to get his family accepted by the local gentry, Jack Atwood did not know whether he would be able to survive the coming winter. He and his younger brother, Will, were left to share the Atwood cottage. Their only source of income at this point was to hire out as field laborers to wealthier peasants, such as Matthew, or work on the local lord’s demesnes. Unfortunately, by this point in the secular cycle half of the villagers did not have enough land to support themselves, and the competition for jobs was fierce.
