Wealthier citizens served as cavalry, and for this reason the Roman aristocratic class was known as equestrians or knights. The property qualification for a knight was 400,000 asses. At the top of the Roman hierarchy were the senatorial families, who served as cavalry and top officers. The senators and their families constituted around 1 percent of the population, and their average wealth was probably close to 1 million asses. In other words, the richest 1 percent of the Romans during the early Republic was only 10 to 20 times as wealthy as an average Roman citizen. This is a remarkably low degree of economic inequality for a pre-industrial population, and even for a modern democratic society. To put these numbers in perspective, consider that in 2000 a median household in the United States had wealth of about $60,000. The top 1 percent of households’ average worth was $12 million, or 200 times that of the median. We take pride in the U.S. as a country of equal opportunity, but the sad fact is that our society is much less egalitarian than that of the early Roman Republic.

Economic inequality in a typical ancient or medieval state was much greater than in the early Rome, or even in the United States today. By around A.D. 400, just before the collapse of the empire and when the degree of wealth inequality reached its maximum value, an average Roman noble of senatorial class had property valued in the neighborhood of 20,000 Roman pounds of gold. There was no “middle class” comparable to the small landholders of the third century B.C.; the huge majority of the population was made up of landless peasants working land that belonged to nobles. These peasants had hardly any property at all, but if we estimate it (very generously) at one tenth of a pound of gold, the wealth differential would be 200,000! Inequality grew both as a result of the rich getting richer (late imperial senators were 100 times wealthier than their Republican predecessors) and those of middling wealth becoming poor, indeed destitute.
