DURING THE FIRST SIX CENTURIES AFTER the birth of Christ, the geopolitical configuration of the Middle East stayed relatively stable, with the political landscape dominated by two huge empires. In the west, the Mediterranean littoral (roughly, modern Israel, Lebanon, and Syria) was part of the Roman Empire and then of its successor, the Byzantine Empire. Until the early third century, the territory east of the Euphrates belonged to the Parthians; after that date, to the successor state of Sassanian Persia. Between the two imperial frontiers was wedged a huge area of dry steppe and desert, which extends south into the Arabian Peninsula. The northern part of this arid zone is called the Syrian desert, but there is no physical barrier between it and the Arabian desert to the south. The people who inhabited this region then (and still do so now) were the Arabs. The main adaptation that allowed the Arabs to live in the desert was domestication of the camel and the invention of the camel riding saddle. Camels could survive and thrive in areas where sheep and goats could not. They provided their owners with milk, meat, leather, and wool. But their most important advantage over other domesticated animals was their ability to carry people and goods through waterless wastes of Syria and Arabia. The camel was the critical “technology” that allowed the Arabs to expand over the whole Syrian and Arabian deserts during the first millennium B.C.

Not all Arabs were nomadic pastoralists. Some made a living from long-distance trade. (Several lucrative caravan routes ran through the desert.) Others penetrated into the borderlands of the Roman and Persian empires, and switched to a semi-nomadic way of life, or even settled down to agriculture. (Agriculture was also practiced in the oases of the Arabian Peninsula.) Finally, a number of cities in the Fertile Crescent, such as Palmyra, Edessa, and Hira, were ruled by Arab dynasties that arose in the Ibn Khaldunian fashion.
