The Carolingian Empire was the embryonic form of what we now call Western civilization. The main bulk of Latin Christendom, that part of medieval Europe that was Roman Catholic, rather than Orthodox or non-Christian, consisted of the Carolingian successor states (for example, France and the German Reich). To this core were added regions that were conquered (Spain and Prussia, for example) or proselytized (for example, Denmark and Poland) from the formerly Carolingian lands. Although never united politically, the inhabitants of Latin Christendom knew that they belonged together in a certain, supranational sense. They were unified by their common faith, headed by the pope in Rome, by shared culture, and by the common language of literature, liturgy, and international diplomacy, Latin. As the historian-medievalist Robert Bartlett argued in The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization and Cultural Change, 950-1350, the outsiders were also aware of this metaethnic identity, and called Latin Christians collectively “the Franks” (Faranga in Arabic, Fraggoi in Greek). The minstrel Ambroise wrote about the First Crusade, “When Syria was recovered in the other war and Antioch besieged, the great wars and battles against the Turks and miscreants, so many of whom were slaughtered, there was no plotting or squabbling, no one asked who was Norman or French, who Poitevin or Breton, who from Maine or Burgundy, who was Flemish or English ... all were called ‘Franks’, be they brown or bay or sorrel or white.” Latin Christendom was the direct predecessor of Western civilization, and even the religious schism of the Reformation, despite the rivers of blood that it undammed, turned out to be a quarrel within family. It did not destroy the metaethnic identity whose roots go back to the Carolingians.

Even today, it is easy to see the traces of this identity. The first members of the European Union were, and the most enthusiastic proponents of the European Union are, France, Germany, the countries of Benelux, and Italy—almost precisely the regions that were part of the Carolingian Empire. Any region that during the Middle Ages was Roman Catholic, whether it is now Catholic or Protestant, is welcome within the European Union. Poles, Croatians, and the Czechs were eagerly encouraged to join, as soon as they freed themselves from Soviet domination. By contrast, Muslim Turkey, even though a part of NATO for more than half a century, is not a member yet, and it is doubtful that it will become one. Formerly Orthodox Ukraine and Belarus are most emphatically not welcome. Even Greece was accepted in the European Union only as a result of heavy-handed American pressure.
