An alternative way of thinking about rise and fall looks to the internal workings of states and societies, rather than some external agent, be it the goddess of Fortune or climatic change. This way of thinking originated within physical sciences during the days of Newton and Leibnitz and was, in large degree, responsible for the brilliant successes of such fields as classical mechanics and thermodynamics. During the last two or three decades, it spread to biology and social sciences under the guise of “the science of nonlinear dynamics.”

The gist of the approach was admirably expressed by George Puttenham in 1589: “Peace makes plentie, plentie makes pride, pride breeds quarrel, and quarrel breeds warre: Warre brings spoile, and spoile povertie, povertie pacience, and pacience peace: So peace brings warre and warre brings peace.” What is important here is not the specific details of how one thing leads to another, but the absence of a simple, linear causal relationship. What causes “warre”? Peace. But peace itself is caused by war. So there is no cause and effect, or rather each is both the cause and the effect. War brings peace, and peace brings war, and so on, cycle after cycle, ad infinitum. The causation is not linear, but circular.

How does this insight help us understand why agrarian societies experience periodic crises every two or three centuries? By itself it doesn’t, but it points to how we can gain understanding. Measurements of things that change with time need to be done, variables can then be quantified, equations connecting them composed, and then those equations can be tested against the data of historic and current realities. This grand process of the making of the science of world history has begun, and many results are in. Unfortunately, these results do not read like narratives. Only specialists can get excited about technical papers with titles such as “Dynamical Feedbacks Between Population Growth and Sociopolitical Instability in Agrarian States,” and I admit to sharing this kind of pleasure. Here, however, I will strip all the mathematical and statistical scaffolding away and focus on the main edifice. Specifically, we will trace economic and social changes in France during the medieval cycle and observe “how one thing led to another,” so that in the end a brilliant and powerful state collapsed in ruins.
