Putnam is correct that the north-south divide existed at least a thousand years ago. To locate the actual point when the divide arose, however, it is necessary to go another millennium back in time, to the Roman Empire. In Chapter 11 we saw how an asabiya black hole developed in the core region of the Roman Empire—the Italian Peninsula and Sicily—but not in the Po Valley. After the collapse of the empire, northern Italy was settled by several waves of Germanic immigrants, most notably the Langobards/Lombards during the sixth century. These immigrants came from high-asabiya societies, and their influx reinforced the north-south divide that formed under the empire. Because no metaethnic frontier formed in northern Italy, its inhabitants never developed high asabiya necessary for building a large state (before the Italian unification of the nineteenth century, which was discussed in Chapter 11). As a result, only medium-sized states developed there, starting with the Lombard kingdom in the seventh century, and then the states built by Milan, Florence, and Venice during the Middle Ages. But even such medium levels of asabiya were much more than what was available in the south, where no internal attempts at state building have developed since the fall of the Roman Empire. The Norman kingdom in southern Italy, after all, was kept cohesive by the high asabiya of the Norman invaders. When they assimilated and lost their group solidarity, other influxes of asabiya were necessary to maintain centralized government in the region.

IT IS A STARTLING IDEA THAT certain cultural differences between Lombardians and Calabrians of the twenty-first century might actually be due to events that occurred two thousand years ago. Yet we know that asabiya changes very slowly. Two or three centuries on a very intense metaethnic frontier seems to be the minimum time needed to nurture high asabiya. World empires often last a millennium, so the decline of asabiya is equally slow. Asabiya black holes can persist for centuries, and why not for millennia, if no frontier happens to hit upon it?

This raises an important problem, perhaps the most important: Is understanding the life cycle of imperial nations any real use to us now? I have developed the theory of cliodynamics explicitly for agrarian societies and tested it with historical data—but can the theory be extended to modern times we live in? Can it help us understand the politics of today, and even perhaps help us avoid some of the mistakes that our predecessors committed? Let us look at one specific attempt to apply one of the theories that we discussed to our present social problems.
