Religion was the glue that held the Muscovite society together. Certain norms, such as the willingness “to suffer for the faith”—that is, to sacrifice one’s comfort and even life itself, to endure hardship for the sake of doing the right thing—were deeply ingrained in the people. Although acts inspired by faith did not have the ostensible function of community survival, indirectly they always contributed to it. Let’s turn again to the Stroganov Chronicle, which describes how before the critical battle the atamans exhorted the Cossacks to “suffer for the true Orthodox faith.” Laying down one’s life in the fight against the heathen was an act of piety. The Muscovites cooperated not because it was the rational thing to do, but because it was the right thing to do.

Selfless cooperation was not the only motive urging Ermak’s Cossacks to battle the Tatars. Rather, they had a variety of motivations, among which the hope for the loot was clearly neither last nor least. In general, people’s actions are influenced by a combination of self-interest, the fear of punishment, and norms—socially determined rules of behavior. Much of the time people behave in a self-serving manner, but sometimes they do things not to gain a material reward or to avoid punishment, but simply because it is right. The rewards for doing the right thing are nonmaterial—for example, internal satisfaction and perhaps social approval.

Now think of two armies of the same size. The soldiers in both armies are paid the same amount, and are subject to the same system of punishments for dereliction of duty. In the first army, however, soldiers are motivated only by these material inducements, whereas in the second army they believe that fighting the enemy is the right thing to do. For example, they might fight for their faith and country, or they might believe that their goal in life is extermination of the evil enemy. What will happen when these two armies clash in a battle? Unless a miracle occurs, the first one will fall apart and will be trounced by the second. Generally, in a struggle between two groups of people, the group with stronger norms promoting cooperation and the most people following such norms has a greater chance of winning.
