The first step in resolving this puzzle is to realize that the question is ill-posed—it does not make sense as formulated. The history of the Byzantine Empire is not well known even among the well-educated Western public, and what is known is heavily mythologized—the Byzantine Empire is portrayed as an oriental despotism in a permanent state of decadence. To qualify something as “Byzantine” is certainly not a compliment! The roots of the negative attitude toward Byzantium go all the way back to the times of the Crusades. In 1204, the Western knights, instead of attacking the Muslims, treacherously attacked and sacked Constantinople. Then, to add insult to injury, they spread tales about “perfidious Greeks.” The intellectual tradition of dumping on the Byzantines began in the eighteenth century with Edward Gibbon’s The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Gibbon begins his tale with the golden age of the Antonine emperors (the second century A.D.) and, according to him, it was all downhill from that point on—for more than 12 centuries! A “decline” of such long duration loses any utility as an analytical concept. As the historian of Byzantium Warren Treadgold noted, even nowadays most historians tend to concentrate on the first and last third of Byzantine history, the periods that fit the best idea of decline. The middle third, when the internally cohesive and militarily strong Byzantine Empire expanded its territory over three centuries from 230,000 to 460,000 square miles (0.6 to 1.2 million square kilometers), gets much less attention. Gibbon raced through this period in one chapter, and devoted the rest of his three fat volumes to the “decadent” periods.
