An important element of Ibn Khaldun’s theory is the corrosive effect of “luxury” on group solidarity. He argues that as the former tribesmen forget the rude ways of the desert, and become accustomed to the new luxurious life, they somehow become “enervated.” This aspect is actually the weakest component of the theory. It is not clear at all why “luxury” should be detrimental to the military effectiveness of a group. Such “luxurious” habits as good food, sound shelter from the elements, and bathing should promote good health, and thus have a positive effect on military prowess. Even obvious “excesses,” such as immoderate drinking and feasting, did not seem to impair the military effectiveness of, for example, barbarian Franks or the later Vikings. On the contrary, collective feasting creates the feeling of camaraderie that strengthens group cohesion. Ancient writers frequently inveighed against the supposedly enervating effect of luxury. But it does not seem to be good sociology. Interestingly, Ibn Khaldun, who also devotes a lot of space to this theme, nevertheless hedges his message. He says, “luxury will at first give additional strength to a dynasty. The reason for this is that a tribe that has acquired royal authority and luxury is prolific and produces many children, so that the community grows. Thus, the group grows. Furthermore, a great number of clients and followers is acquired. The new generation grows up in a climate of prosperity and luxury.” Luxury begins to play a negative role only “when the first and second generations are gone, and the dynasty starts to become senile.” Ibn Khaldun’s explanation of how the ruling dynasty loses its asabiya is weak, because he relies too much on inappropriate biological analogies: “Dynasties have a natural span like individuals.” We need to do better to explain the process of social dissolution, but this is a large task, and I do not fully develop my explanation until Part II.

The last element of Ibn Khaldun’s theory that will be useful to us is the role of religion. Ibn Khaldun points out that religion gives a dynasty another power in addition to that of asabiya. It “does away with mutual jealousy and envy among people who share in an asabiya.” When people are united by religion, “nothing can withstand them, because their outlook is one and their object is one of common accord. They are willing to die for their objective.” Although Ibn Khaldun does not say it directly, it seems that the religious feeling is a sort of asabiya, but one that can unite broader groups than tribal-level asabiya. This is a very important insight, especially for the Bedouin societies of North Africa and Arabia, where religion played a particularly important role in empire building.

The insights from Ibn Khaldun’s theory can help us to understand better the history of societies on Rome’s desert frontier during the first millennium A.D.
