The importance that Polybius assigns to the formative influence of the Gauls in the rise of the Roman Empire is made clear at the beginning of his history: “The date I have chosen, then, to mark the beginning of the establishment of Roman power in Italy” is the year when “the Gauls captured Rome by storm and were occupying the whole city except for the Capitol.” Later he says, “For those who desire a complete and comprehensive account of the development of Rome’s present supremacy, ... they must acquaint themselves with the period and the process whereby the Romans began to advance towards better fortunes after the defeat they suffered on their own soil.” In a chapter titled “Rome and the Gauls,” Polybius describes the almost continuous wars the Romans fought against the Gauls during the fourth and third centuries, and concludes: “There were two great advantages which the Romans gained from these struggles. In the first place, once they become accustomed to suffering great losses at the hands of the Gauls, there was no more terrifying experience than this which they need expect either to undergo or fear. Secondly, by the time they had to meet Pyrrhus they came to contest like trained and seasoned athletes in military operations.” Throughout his book, Polybius continues to stress the Gallic-Roman relations. “The Romans ... regarded the threat from the north as by far the most pressing of their problems.” And: “The age-old terror inspired by the Gauls had never been altogether dispelled” (at least this was true for the second century B.C., when Polybius wrote these lines).

THE ROMANS WERE FATED TO STRUGGLE against the Gauls for four centuries, finally triumphing over them only with the conquest of the Transalpine Gaul by Julius Caesar. During the fourth and third centuries B.C., the Romans and other peoples of peninsular Italy were subjected to constant small-scale raiding, punctuated by large-scale invasions, from northern Italy. It was only toward the end of the third century, when the Romans gathered enough strength to mount a sustained effort to “pacify” the Gauls of the Po Valley. The campaign of conquest was successful, but its effect turned out to be short-lived.
