The khanate of Crimea enjoyed an advantageous geopolitical situation, which explains why the contest between it and Muscovy took three centuries to resolve. Its capital, Bakhchisarai, was located on the Crimean Peninsula, which could be attacked only after crossing an easily defended Isthmus of Perekop. Even more important was the control by the Crimeans of the huge steppe territory of southern Russia. These steppes created a buffer zone hundreds of miles deep, a zone easily crossed by the Tatar cavalry, but extremely difficult to penetrate with a European-style army composed primarily of foot soldiers and burdened by heavy supply carts.

Although Bakhchisarai was the political capital of the Crimean khanate, the most economically important city in Crimea was Caffa. Caffa is associated with some of the darkest pages of European history. In 1346, when Caffa was in Genoese hands, the Mongols besieged it. When the besiegers started to die from a new disease recently arrived from Central Asia, they catapulted several of the diseased corpses into the town, and then departed. Within a year, the disease traveled from Caffa to all major Mediterranean ports. During the next three years, half of the European population died in the pandemic of the Bubonic Plague, also known as the Black Death.

The Ukrainians referred to Caffa as “the vampire that drinks the blood of Russia” because both under the Genoese and after its conquest by the Turks this port city was the main entrepôt for the slave trade on the Black Sea. Over the centuries, literally millions of eastern Slavs and other peoples inhabiting the forest region north of the steppe were sold in Caffa and shipped to a variety of destinations in the Mediterranean. Most male slaves sold in Caffa probably ended up rowing the galleys. At any given time during the seventeenth century, the city had 30,000 or more slaves. The supply of slaves was so plentiful that there were no free domestic servants in Caffa.

In the second half of the fifteenth century, the Genoese lost Caffa to the Ottoman Empire. The Turks governed Caffa directly, and also exercised an indirect control over the rest of the peninsula, because in 1475 the khan of Crimea became the vassal of the sultan. However, the Turkish-supplied artillery and janissaries became involved only in large-scale military operations against Russia and Poland-Lithuania, leaving the usual steppe raiding entirely in the hands of the Tatars. The Crimean army consisted of 40,000 to 50,000 horse warriors. When allies from other hordes and various other volunteer predators joined this army, its size could swell to 100,000 and more. However, a more typical raid was conducted with “only” 15,000 to 20,000 horsemen led by one of the khan’s murzas (a Tatar princeling).
