Most of the population on the Iberian frontier lived in towns. As on the Russian frontier, the role of towns was not economic, but defensive. The numerous fortified communities dotting the frontier region provided a defense in depth against the Muslim raids. Unlike the Russians, however, the Castilians did not build defensive lines. Whereas the Russians had grain fields to protect, the main economic activity in Castile was sheep herding, and it was easier to bring the sheep flocks inside the walls when a raid threatened. Another difference between the two frontiers was that whereas the Russian frontier was mainly of the “push” type (due to the murderous pressure from the raiding Tatar parties), the Iberian frontier, after the Reconquest gathered steam, was mainly of the “pull” kind. The rich Muslim lands and towns in southern Spain offered opportunities for plunder and were more attractive to Christian raiders than anything offered from other compass points.

The municipal militias played the key role in the Iberian Reconquest. There was no single center orchestrating military operations. Instead various Christian kingdoms (Navarre, Leon, Aragon, Portugal, and Castile) operated independently of each other, and often fought with each other. Eventually, three main pushes developed: the Aragonese down the Mediterranean coast, the Portuguese along the Atlantic littoral, and the Castilians down the middle. Even within each kingdom, such as Castile, advance was achieved not by royal armies winning spectacular victories. In fact, the Christians lost most of the major battles prior to the thirteenth century! (As I have commented before, the ability of winning despite repeated setbacks seems to be one of the talents that high-asabiya nations have.) But groups of frontiersmen, driven by relentless pressure to colonize, won numerous small victories, and that was what powered the advance. “Different men, different regimes, different attainments,” wrote the historian of Medieval Spain Claudio Sánchez-Albornoz, “but always, always, century after century, following battle, colonization, and after colonization, battle.” The same words could be said about the Cossacks and peasants on the Russia’s steppe frontier.
