In the model, the poor lost their remaining land by being forced to sell it to the rich, parcel by parcel, to stave off starvation. What actually happened in most historical societies was that the poor did not sell their land outright, but used it as a collateral for loans to tide over a bad patch (a year of poor harvest, or temporary inability to obtain extra work). In the end, however, the land was still lost, when the debtors found themselves unable to repay the loans.

IF WE START WITH COMPLETELY EQUITABLE distribution of property, in just one generation the society will stratify into those who have more, and those who have less. The only way to stop this process constantly breeding inequality is by either abolishing private property altogether or by abolishing the right to inherit it. A milder form of keeping inequality in check is a steeply progressive tax on inheritance. In other words, some sort of redistributive scheme could be used. Also, a variable number of heirs is only one, although very powerful, mechanism of inequality production. Some people are hardworking, others not so; some are smart, others dumb; some are lucky, others not. Such differences between people result in different rates at which they accumulate wealth. The institution of private property then stores the wealth differences, and the institution of inheritance transmits it across generations.

The mathematical model I developed, however, tells us that this mechanism by itself will not produce a vast gulf between the rich and the poor. When land becomes a scarce commodity, however, another process begins to operate. Human beings need to consume a certain amount of goods to survive. Most basically, they have to get enough food. Those who do not have enough land to feed themselves will have to start selling what they have to make up the difference. As a result, they become poorer. By contrast, those who have more land than they need to feed themselves will have a surplus income that they can use to acquire even more land. Thus, the rich get richer. The positive feedback of the Matthew principle arises as a result of threshold of the minimum consumption level. The Matthew principle ensures that all people whose land holdings are below the threshold—the poor—gradually lose their remaining property, which ends up in the hands of the rich. Finally, the population is divided into a tiny minority of wealthy landowners and a huge majority of landless proletarians.
