Finally, the revolutionary excesses of Caboche’s butchers turned the moderate burghers against them (as they turned against Marcel two generations ago). They approached the dauphin Charles (the future Charles VII and the grandson of Charles the Wise) who called for help from the Armagnacs. The Armagnacs entered Paris on August 4. The balance of power swung against the faction of Caboche and John the Fearless, who was pulling the strings from the background. The butchers attempted to storm the town hall, but were repulsed. The Burgundians then made an attempt to kidnap the king, which was also frustrated, and John the Fearless left the capital in defeat. Caboche survived by also fleeing Paris.

By 1414, the Armagnacs won control of most of France. But there was a new king in England, young and ambitious, who was keenly observing the anarchy in France—Henry V. After allying himself with John the Fearless, Henry V invaded France in 1415 and met the French forces at Agincourt. The battle of Agincourt was a close replay of Crécy. A small army of 10,000 English won a resounding victory over a chaotic throng of three times as many French knights. At the end of the day, 10,000 corpses of the French nobility lay in heaps on the field of battle.

As the English leisurely completed the conquest of Normandy, the Burgundian forces besieged Paris held by the count of Armagnac. The Armagnac hold on the capital was broken when the Burgundian partisans rose in Paris and killed thousands of Armagnacs. When the Burgundians entered the capital in May 1418, it was littered with Armagnac corpses “piled up like pigs in the mud,” as reported by an eyewitness. The dauphin and the surviving Armagnacs had to abandon Paris to the Burgundians.

The following year (1419), Rouen surrendered to Henry V and the English conquest of Normandy was complete. The English successes gave John the Fearless second thoughts, and he attempted to negotiate with the dauphin and the Armagnacs. But during the meeting between the dauphin and the duke of Burgundy at the bridge of Montereau, intended to cement the treaty of friendship, the Armagnacs treacherously killed John in revenge for the murder of Louis of Orléans 12 years earlier. The new duke, Philip the Good, swore vengeance and returned to the English alliance. Working with the Burgundians, the English overran northern France and installed themselves in Paris. By the treaty of Troyes (1421), Henry V married the daughter of Charles VI and was named the heir to the French throne, while the dauphin was disinherited. In 1422 both Charles VI and Henry V died. The infant Henry VI of England was recognized as king of France in the north, supported by the Burgundians, and later crowned in Paris.
