As a result of epidemics, famines, and ceaseless warfare, the population declined, freeing land for the landless. The aristocrats became poorer, and after a few generations their descendants became used to the less-ostentatious way of life. Archaeological evidence suggests that luxury imports (mainly brought by the Greek traders) declined drastically. Opulent burials disappeared. Wealth inequality decreased. The social system, so disturbed around 500 B.C., returned slowly and painfully to an equilibrium. Aiding this process was the external pressure from the hill tribes of Aequi and Volsci, and from the Etruscans of Veii, which helped to consolidate different orders by focusing their minds on the task of common survival. Toward the end of the fifth century, Rome largely subdued the hill tribes. After reverses during the first and second wars with Veii, Rome was finally successful in conquering it for good in 396. This was a momentous event, because it signaled the closure of the Etruscan-Latin frontier. However, resting on the laurels was not to be Rome’s fate. A short six years later, Rome was subjected to a tremendous shock that would first bring it to the brink of precipice, but in the long run set it on the path to empire. The traumatic event, as terrifying as a Nazi blitzkrieg or a terrorist mass murder, was the Gallic sack of Rome in 390.

THE CELTS, OR GAULS, AS the Romans called them, entered northern Italy sometime during the sixth or fifth century. The Celts did not build a centralized territorial state. Instead, they usually operated as independent bands of warriors who, nevertheless, were capable of uniting under a charismatic leader when they encountered significant opposition. The Etruscan cities in the Po Valley succumbed to the Gallic pressure, and the north of Italy became Gallic (and was henceforth known to the Romans as the Cisalpine Gaul, as distinguished from the Transalpine Gaul—modern France and Belgium). Thus, during the fifth century, the “barbarism-civilization” frontier shifted south to the Apennine hills dividing the Po Valley from Tyrrhenian Italy. A few towns of the Veneti (near modern Venice) were the only remaining outposts of the Mediterranean civilization north of the Apennines.

The intensity of the new frontier dwarfed ethnic divisions on the Italian Peninsula, such as that between the Etruscans and the Latins. By 400 B.C., these two peoples, although speaking different languages and possessing distinct ethnic identities and religious cults, had acquired similar social and political institutions. Both belonged to the literate and urbanized Mediterranean civilization. After many centuries of conflict, they came to use similar methods of conducting war. The “savage Gauls” were an entirely different kind of people.
