The richest man in England in the late fourteenth century was John of Gaunt, the duke of Lancaster and the son of Edward III and uncle to Richard II. Gaunt married Blanche of Lancaster, grand-niece of Earl Thomas and the sole heiress to the Lancaster fortune. The annual income of the duke of Lancaster was close to £15,000. In 1399, John of Gaunt’s son Henry Bolingbroke overthrew Richard II, and became the new king. As a result, the Lancaster inheritance was merged into the crown. In the next generation, the largest fortune belonged to Richard of York, another descendant of Edward III. His annual income in 1436 was assessed as £3,230. The only other income of more than £3,000 was that of the earl of Warwick—compared to six such incomes a century before. In fact, even these two large fortunes were soon to disappear. The York inheritance was added to the crown in the same way as Lancaster’s, when Richard of York’s son deposed Henry VI Lancaster and was crowned as Edward IV in 1461. The Warwick fortune was absorbed by the crown after 1471, when Richard Neville, the earl of Warwick, was killed in battle fighting against Edward IV.

Destruction of the great fortunes continued under the Tudors, who had it in for their over-rich and over-mighty subjects. The first two Tudors, Henry VII and Henry VIII, employed judicial murder with great effect, systematically exterminating all potential claimants to the English throne, who also happened to be among the richest landowners. Elizabeth I crafted a gentler method—a kind of “progressive taxation” scheme. When one of her subjects became too wealthy, she invited herself to his castle along with her whole court. After some weeks of dining and wining the queen and hundreds of her followers, the unfortunate host was financially ruined for many years to come, and was too busy paying off his debts to contemplate rebellion.
