Wealth inequality in the Roman Empire reached its peak during the fourth century, but its growth was not linear. As discussed earlier in the chapter, the first leap in economic inequality occurred during the disintegrative phase of the republican cycle (second and first century B.C.), when the typical wealth of a Roman senator increased to 10-20 million sesterces. During the integrative phase of the Dominate, senatorial wealth apparently did not grow. For example, Pliny the Younger, a senator of middling wealth at the end of the first century, had an annual income of 1.1 million sesterces. Because the typical yield on capital in agrarian societies is around 6 percent, an income of 1.1 million implies a total wealth of 15-20 million, or about the same as under the late Republic. But during the disintegrative phase of the Principate, wealth inequality jumped again. Middling aristocrats in the western empire in the late fourth century had incomes of 1,333 to 2,000 Roman pounds of gold. Translating this number into total wealth, we have 100-150 million sesterces. In other words, the personal fortunes of aristocrats increased by another order of magnitude, and that at a time when the empire was shrinking and the total amount of wealth was diminishing. This increase in the wealth of the elites had to come at the expense of the pauperization of the commoners. Everything we know about the late empire supports this view.

By the fifth century, the Italian society, if we can still call it that, had lost any remnants of ability to act in a concerted manner. Italians did not serve in the legions or as government officials. Central authorities could not collect taxes. The magnates ignored any orders issued by the imperial government, and began raising private armies. These private forces, however, were completely ineffectual against the barbarians who invaded Italy during the fifth century.
