The first civil war was won in 197 by Septimus Severus, the commander of the Danube legions. As usual, it was followed by a relatively peaceful generation—the reigns of Septimus himself and then his son Caracalla. In 217, however, Caracalla was murdered. His demise unleashed a veritable epidemic of emperor assassinations. (Four emperors were killed one after another between 217 and 235.) The last assassination triggered a general civil war, which was to drag on for 50 years. The imperiopathosis of the Roman nation went into its acute phase, and sometime during this period the patient died.

SEPARATING CONTINUOUS PROCESSES INTO discrete phases is always arbitrary, but if I were pressed to say just when did the Roman Empire end, I would choose A.D. 268. This was the year when a cabal of officers from the Danubian frontier assassinated the emperor Gallienus, and took the business of the empire into their own hands. They produced a string of ruthless and capable rulers, known as the “Illyrian soldier-emperors.” One of them, Diocletian, reunited the empire in 285. Another, Constantine, moved the capital to Constantinople in 330. They continued to call themselves “Romans,” but they and their soldiers were the germ of a new imperial nation, not the one that was born on the banks of Tiber a millennium before—the new nation that would eventually build the Byzantine empire. These “Illyrians” did not trust Italians. (That is probably why they killed Gallienus, who seemed to be a good sort and tried hard—but he was not one of them.) And they had a good reason not to, because the Italians had clearly lost any remaining asabiya by this point.

The cohesive nation of citizen-soldiers was gone. Instead of them, the core region of the Roman Empire was inhabited by an atomized society, characterized by extreme degrees of social and economic inequality, and an almost total lack of solidarity bonds between individuals. This state of affairs was a product of several centuries of operation of the Matthew principle. Slave plantations began spreading in Italy during the second century B.C. and largely displaced freeholds during the next century. Under the Principate, the numbers of slaves employed in agriculture gradually diminished and eventually they were replaced with coloni—tenant farmers of the great landowners. Although slavery disappeared, the gap between the peasants and the aristocrats continued to grow. As in the post-Civil War southern American states, the magnates of the later Roman Empire continued to have a strong interest in inhibiting horizontal social networks among their tenants. They were also making a concerted effort to tie peasants to the land. By A.D. 400, the legal codes refer to tenants as “slaves of the land.”
