We are interested in one particular piece of information provided by inquisitions post mortem—the total number of male heirs alive at the death of a tenant-in-chief. When averaged over hundreds of individuals, this number, called the replacement rate, tells us what were the numeric dynamics of this population group for any given period of time. When the replacement rate was greater than one, the numbers of noblemen were increasing. On the other hand, if the replacement rate is less than one—that is, each dying father leaves, on average, fewer than one son—the overall numbers must be shrinking.

The story that inquisitions post mortem tell us is quite striking. During the last half of the thirteenth century, the English nobility did very well indeed—each tenant-in-chief left on average 1.48 sons. As a result of this demographic growth, the nobility numbers between 1250 and 1300 should have almost doubled. The bulk of the commoner population increase, however, was pretty much over by the middle of the thirteenth century; certainly the numbers of commoners did not increase at anywhere near the rate of the nobility. With the numeric ratio of nobles to commoners increasing, by 1300 the social pyramid was noticeably more top-heavy than 50 years before. Things got even worse after 1300. As noted previously, in the early fourteenth century the commoner population was actually decreasing, losing perhaps 10 percent even before the arrival of the Black Death. By contrast, the nobility’s replacement rate was a healthy 1.23, implying a 40 percent increase in their total numbers during the first half of the fourteenth century.

The dramatic increase in the numbers of nobles in relation to the productive class had the same consequences as the increase of general population beyond the means of production—the economic position of nobility suffered. Put simply, when there are more people dividing the same pie, each gets a smaller slice. Many nobles found that their revenues were insufficient to support them in the style to which the previous generation was accustomed. Decreasing the level of consumption was unthinkable because it meant losing the elite status, and nobles responded by extracting a greater proportion of resources from peasants, by seeking supplemental sources of income with the state, and by going in debt. None of these strategies was sustainable in the long run. The state could not employ all impoverished nobles—there were too many of them, and the crown itself was sliding into financial insolvency, as discussed later in this chapter. Extracting greater revenues from peasants meant that the landlords went beyond skimming the surplus and started cutting into the resources that peasants needed to survive. Landlord oppression was undermining their own economic basis, as peasants declined by flight, starvation, or even death in futile rebellions.
