In his book The Great Wave, David Hackett Fischer traces four secular waves of the European history in the last millennium. We have already discussed the first two waves. The first one is the high Middle Ages (the integrative phase) followed by the crisis of the fourteenth century (the disintegrative phase). The second one is the Renaissance (integrative phase), followed by the crisis of the seventeenth century (disintegrative phase). The third wave is the Enlightenment (integrative phase) followed by the age of revolution (disintegrative phase).

The fourth wave, argued Fischer, is what we are living through now. The integrative phase started with the equilibrium of the Victorian era (second half of the nineteenth century) and continued through most of the twentieth century. The last half of this phase, and especially since 1960, was characterized by persistent price inflation, something that occurred in every cycle. The disintegrative phase has begun in the late twentieth century.

Fischer holds that the same majestic rhythm Western societies marched to continues to resonate to this very day. His critics were harsh. Paul Krugman was one of them. His critique acknowledged that Fischer is on to something—the empirical evidence for secular cycles is unassailable. But Krugman rightly criticized Fischer for his overly cavalier treatment of modernity. One cannot assume that the social and economic forces that operated in agrarian societies to produce secular cycles would continue behaving in the same way today. One cannot disregard the seismic changes that have occurred during the last century or two. We live in a very different world from that inhabited by the Romans or the Normans, or even the Europeans of the Napoleonic era.

Food production typically employed 90 percent of the population of agrarian societies. Before the industrial revolution, population growth during every secular cycle was stopped when people ran out of things to eat. Today, however, England’s population is 10 times greater than at the peaks of the fourteenth and seventeenth centuries, and this population is fed from a fraction of the area that was cultivated during those peaks. The English, like Americans, get some of their food from abroad, but the main reason there is no famine in England or any developed nation today is that the productivity of an acre of cropland is now more than ten times what it was in the Middle Ages.

The green revolution, which increased crop yields in temperate countries, is not over yet. We are now seeing a similar change in the tropics. Brazil is poised to flood world markets with cheap food. However, whole regions in modern equatorial Africa continue to experience widespread famines.
