As a new level of social complexity arose, the lower levels of organization were not completely eroded. As a result, people in general have coexisting identities, nested within each other. They can feel attachment and loyalty to their native town, their region, their country, and even to supranational organizations. The degree of identification with, and loyalty felt toward, an identity at any particular level can vary a lot. The attitudes of the modern Germans and the French toward their regional, national, and supranational identities are in stark contrast. The French can be quite attached to their regional identities, but they are first and foremost French. Their supranational identity as members of the European Union also takes a second seat to their Frenchness. By contrast, numerous sociological studies have shown that the post-war Germans identify primarily with their regional and supranational identities, and de-emphasize the national one. Thus, an inhabitant of southern Germany will think of himself or herself as a Bavarian and a European, tending to skip the intermediate level of German. Consequently, the Germans have been the most enthusiastic promoters of the European Union. This example also illustrates how the strength of identification with national identity can change with time. Up to and during World War II, of course, the Germans were fervently nationalistic—“Deutschland über alles”—but the shock of defeat and subsequent anti-Nazi propaganda discredited this identity for most of them. A similar de-emphasis of the identity associated with the state, but for a different reason, is observed among such ethnic minorities as the Catalans (many of whom would object strenuously to being called “Spanish”) or the Catholic Irish in the United Kingdom. Such ethnic groups also tend to be ardent supporters of the European integration. In sum, different levels of social identity can evoke strong or weak feelings of loyalty, and the intensity of these feelings change as history unfolds.

Although the disposition to moralism or knavery might have a substantial genetic component, it is clear that temporal changes in the intensity of ethnic feeling, such as shifts in the main locus of ethnic feeling from regional to national level, and vice versa, must be culture-based. As noted previously in this chapter, cultural evolution can occur on a much faster time scale than changes in genetic frequencies. After moralists and symbolic thinkers evolved through the process of genetic evolution, the rise (and fall) of identification with and loyalty to higher-level identity could happen much more rapidly. Rapidly, that is, when compared to the glacial pace of genetic evolution. The empirical examples that we examined so far suggest that even cultural evolution needs centuries to produce societies capable of wide-scale cooperation.

Chapter 6

Born to Be Wolves

The Origins of Rome
