The Anglo-Saxon historiography tends to play down the glory and power of Spain, but in the sixteenth century it was the supreme power in Europe, and it was a great power until the end of the eighteenth century. It is useful to consider what Pierre de Bourdeille, lord of Brântome, wrote in about 1600 about the achievements of the Spaniards: “They have conquered the Indies, East and West, a whole New World. They have beaten us and chased us out of Naples and Milan. They have passed to Flanders and France itself, taken our towns and beaten us in battle. They have beaten the Germans, which no Roman emperor could do since Julius Caesar. They have crossed the seas and taken Africa. Through little groups of men in citadels, rocks and castles, they have given laws to the rulers of Italy and the estates of Flanders.” High praise indeed from the enemy.

The imperial nation at the core of the Spanish Empire were the Castilians. They carried the burden of the empire. On a per-capita basis, they paid more taxes and supplied greater numbers of recruits for the tercios. They spearheaded the overseas conquests. They also had a knack for cooperating with other peoples within the Spanish Empire. As the historian Henry Kamen recently argued in Empire: How Spain Became a World Power, 1492-1763, the Spanish Empire was a collaboration of the Castilians with the Aragonese, Italians, Flemish, Germans, and even Chinese and Aztecs. Italian financiers, German technicians, and Flemish traders were as critical to the imperial success as Castilian military men and administrators.

The Castilians were made as a nation on the Iberian frontier. The bands of adventurers led by Cortés and Pizarro who conquered the New World and the Spanish tercios that smashed European armies were direct descendants of the Christian militias that battled the Moors during the Reconquest. The frontier transformed the Castilians into “A Society Organized for War” (as the title of James Powers’ book has it). But it not only made Castile into an effective war machine, it also molded the national character of its people—their deep faith, tenacity, sense of honor, and ability to cooperate—all qualities that made them such good imperialists.

THE IBERIAN METAETHNIC FRONTIER HAD a rather simple topology and dynamics—a band of territory extending from east to west, which slowly advanced south (although the advance occurred in fits and starts). The metaethnic interaction zone in northern France had a much more complex history. By “North France” here I mean the territory centered on the Seine River, and extending to the Loire Valley in the south and the Somme in the north. During the Carolingian period, it was called Francia.
