The Suebi led by Maroboduus was specifically a name for a tribal confederation rather than a tribe. Tacitus wrote that “the Suebi, unlike the Chatti or Tencteri, do not constitute an individual tribe: They occupy the greater part of Germania, divided among the nations with names of their own, although all are called Suebi in common. It is characteristic of the tribe to dress their hair on the side and bind it up tight in a knot. This distinguishes the Suebi from the other Germani, and their free-born from their slaves.” The distinctive hairstyle of the Suebi is found in numerous Roman representations (for example, on Trajan’s column in Rome). It is also present on some of the bodies found by archaeologists in bogs. The best preserved is the head of a Germanic warrior found at Osterby in Schleswig-Holstein. The hair knot is a wonderful example of how people use appearance to declare the symbolic boundary between “us” and “them.” In fact, the very name Suebi basically means “us” (“those belonging to our group”). Incidentally, the names of such modern nations as the Swedes and the Swiss have precisely the same origin. The name of the later Alamanni also expressed the same idea, but with a different means. Alamanni means “the (true, real) people,” clearly a variation on the “us” versus “them” theme. The origin of the name the Goths is more obscure, but some authorities think it simply meant “people.” The name for the other great confederation, the Franks, however, had a different logic: it means “the fierce,” “the brave.”

A tribal confederation, such as the Suebi, was still a fragile form of political organization during the time of Maroboduus and Arminius. The individual tribes could easily switch their allegiance from one leader to another. For example, the Langobards (who later played such an important role in Italian history) were initially part of Maroboduus’s confederation. After the battle of the Teutoburg Forest, however, with Arminius’s reputation at its height, they switched their allegiance to him. Furthermore, the institution of kingship was not yet rooted in the culture of the Germans. Individual tribesmen were suspicious of the royal pretensions of their war leaders, and wary of giving them too much power, which they might use to oppress the commons. Tacitus describes the process by which the tribal confederations fell apart and their leaders perished as follows.
