In 1642, Richelieu died, followed soon by Louis XIII. Louis XIV, who was five years old at the time, ascended the French throne. His mother, Anne of Austria, served as regent, while the government of France was entrusted to Cardinal Mazarin (an Italian of modest origins, and reputedly the queen’s lover). Mazarin disbanded the Musketeers of de Treville in 1646, but retained the service of d‘Artagnan as his confidential agent. d’Artagnan served his patron ably and loyally, even during the turbulent years of the Fronde ( 1648-53), when the popular revolt, aided and abetted by the anti-Mazarin faction of powerful nobles, forced the king and his court to flee Paris. In 1651, Anne of Austria, under the pressure from the rebelling nobles, was forced to dismiss Mazarin, and he left the country. In 1653, however, the civil war died out, and Anne was able to recall Mazarin, who served as prime minister until his death in 1661. The loyalty of d’Artagnan was eventually rewarded with the captain-lieutenancy of Musketeers.

The fortunes made by Richelieu and his second-echelon ministers pale into insignificance when compared to the rapacity of state officers during the Mazarin era (which contributed in no small manner to the outbreak of the civil war). Mazarin himself lost all of his fortune in 1651, when he was forced out of office, and had to start from scratch after he regained his position as prime minister in 1653. Yet, when he died in 1661, he left 37 million livres to his heirs! That is, his fortune grew at the rate of nearly 5 million livres per year—50,000 times the annual income of a simple laborer.

The growth of private fortunes, however, reached the peak during the Mazarin era. After Mazarin died, Louis XIV assumed direct control of his government. After a century-long period of discord, which saw two major civil wars and a host of lesser noble revolts and popular uprisings, the French ruling class was ready to close the ranks around the central government. From this point on, for more than a century until the Great Revolution, France saw no significant intra-elite conflict. All energies of the nobility were channeled into external wars, which were practically continuous during the reign of the Sun King. (Louis XIV died in 1715.) d’Artgnan was to die in one of these wars, when during a battle in Holland a musket ball hit him in the throat. Internal consolidation was accompanied by more equitable distribution of wealth (at least among the nobility). The peasants got loaded with heavy taxes to support the aggressive external policy of Louis XIV, and when they rebelled against the crushing burden, this time there were no dissident nobles to weaken the state’s repressive apparatus, and all such rebellions were easily suppressed.
