Seeing no hope and unwilling to fall into the hands of their enemies alive, Varus and most of his officers took their lives, while the remaining soldiers lost their will to fight (and were either slaughtered on the field, or sacrificed later to German gods). The Roman army was obliterated.

We have a fair amount of information about the war leader of the Germans who destroyed Varus and his three legions in the Teutoburg Forest. Arminius belonged to the most illustrious family of the Cherusci, which itself was one of the largest and most powerful tribes inhabiting the Weser region. Prior to the events described by Cassius Dio, he had served with the Romans as a leader of auxiliary troops. Most likely, he commanded a contingent of his own Cherusci during the war between the Romans and the Suebi, a Germanic tribal confederation led by Maroboduus. (This war took place in A.D. 6 in the Danubian region of Pannonia.) Noble lineage and military experience made him a natural candidate for war leader of the Cherusci. His first-hand knowledge of the effect of the Roman conquest on the defeated tribes probably provided a motivation to resist the Roman subjugation of his homeland. Arminius was also an accomplished politician and a charismatic leader, an important factor because the military power of the Cherusci alone was, at best, a match for a single Roman legion (and at one point during the wars, the Romans campaigned in Germany with 11 legions). Arminius persuaded several other tribes to join his anti-Roman confederation. (As in the account of Cassius Dio, some of the waverers joined Arminius only when they saw that the Germans were winning.)

Confederations uniting many tribes under a charismatic leader such as Arminius or Maroboduus were a novel form of political organization for the Germans, which arose only when they came in direct contact with the Roman Empire. The first encounter between the Romans and the Germans occurred when the Cimbri, Teutones, and other tribes invaded the Roman territory about a century before the time of Arminius and were defeated by the great Roman general Marius (105-101 B.C.). This incursion had the character of multiple marauding bands rather than a powerful unified confederation of latter times. The first Germanic leader called rex in the Roman sources was Caesar’s opponent Ariovistus, the leader of a Germanic migration into Gaul in 59 B.C.
