The position of the Dauphinists (formerly Armagnacs) continued to deteriorate during the 1420s. In 1424, they lost the battle of Verneuil, and in 1428 the English began the siege of Orléans. Meanwhile, the Lancastrian France had become a wilderness laid waste by its English garrisons, by Dauphinist raiders, by deserters, and by écorcheurs. The écorcheurs or “flayers” were the heirs of routiers of the previous century. They took their name from their custom of stripping their victims to the skin, although many would not stop at that, and stripped the skin itself from the unfortunates who fell in their hands.

THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER ASKED WHY the population of France did not increase during the second half of the fourteenth century. After the Malthusian pressure was relieved by the Great Famine and, especially, the Black Death, the population rate should have responded. In reality, it did not. For the next hundred years, there were some episodes of tentative recovery, which were reversed by new declines. By the middle of the fifteenth century, the population of France was still half of what it was at the peak of 1300. A sustained period of population growth began only after 1450.

To explain this prolonged period of the “late medieval depression,” which puzzled historians for a long time, we need to go beyond the strict Malthusian theory. As we have just seen, the condition of elite overproduction that started to afflict the French society in the early fourteenth century, and was exacerbated by the general population collapse of 1315-50, was still not abated by 1400. A direct result of that was a series of civil wars, peaking first in the 1350s and then in the 1410s. The internal fighting was exacerbated by popular uprisings, foreign invasions, and by the general collapse of law and order in the countryside. The whole period of 1350-1440 was the “golden age” of routiers and écorcheurs.

The most obvious effect of prolonged political and social instability on the general population was in causing elevated mortality. Peasants were killed directly by royal armies, by the free companies, by bandits and other criminals, and by deadly quarrels. (As discussed before, crime rates exploded during this period all across Europe.) The movement of armies, mercenary bands, and vagabonds also spread around epidemics, thus indirectly contributing to high mortalities. The late Middle Ages were a time when all became intimately acquainted with the Grim Reaper. The cultural reflection of this fascination was the bizarre cult of death that arose in the late fourteenth century and reached a peak during the fifteenth. A new kind of processional play came into vogue—the danse macabre.
