Think about the psychological difficulties involved in the idea of cooperating with a group. It is easy to imagine working together with a concrete person such as Bob or Jane, or a small group of people such as a family. (You can visualize it as people sitting around a table eating supper together.) When the group starts running into dozens of people, however, its “thingness” becomes blurred—its composition keeps changing with time, and its precise physical boundaries are unclear. How can it be made more concrete? In the process of evolution, humans developed the ability to represent such fuzzy entities with tangible objects. One example of a symbol representing a social group is the totem of American Indians. As the great French sociologist Emile Durkheim recognized almost a century ago, the totem is “the symbol of the determined society called the clan. It is its flag; it is the sign by which each clan distinguishes itself from the others, the visible mark of its personality.” Another example is the standard of a Roman legion, called the Eagle. The Eagle was a sacred emblem of the legion; for most intents and purposes, it was the legion. It was better to die to a man than allow the enemy to capture the Eagle.

As a result of our ability to use symbols, the idea of a social group (“us”) has a peculiar grip on human imagination. Because of our psychological makeup, we tend to think of social groups, such as nations, as more real than they are “in reality.” And because people treat nations as real, they behave accordingly, and, paradoxically, make them real.

To illustrate how we imagine nation as more real than “it really is,” think of what images “America” evokes. (Feel free to substitute any country.) What is America? The Stars and Stripes, the national anthem, the White House and the Capitol, the Statue of Liberty, Uncle Sam, the president in the Oval Office, jeans, Coke, apple pie, the American Constitution, the Pledge of Allegiance, “the leader of the free world,” “the Manifest Destiny,” “the land of opportunity,” the visual image of a U.S. map (or just the outline of the lower 48) ... and so on. These are all symbols that emphasize the “thingness” of America. The fact that a large minority of inhabitants of the country were born overseas and many do not even speak English very well, or that in recent elections half of the voters loathed the incumbent of the oval office, whereas most of the remainder loathed equally intensely the challenger for the office, is irrelevant. When people are inspired to die for their country, it does not matter that their country is imagined—the act of sacrifice is real enough. As Durkheim put it, “Social life, in all its aspects and in every period of history, is made possible only by a vast symbolism.”
