As soon as the French regained their social cohesion, England lost its outlet for venting steam. In 1453, the English were expelled from France, and practically immediately, just two years later, England went into its own tailspin. The struggle during the Wars of the Roses was extremely bitter and bloody. Kings were deposed and quietly murdered in prison or killed on the battlefield. Princes were strangled in the Tower of London. After a battle, the peers of the realm from the losing faction were made to kneel in the mud, and their heads were lopped off. Lesser nobility and gentry enthusiastically slaughtered each other in a host of small-scale feuds that broke out all over the country. Toward the end of the fifteenth century, the English ruling class was pruned to the point where stability could gradually begin to reassert itself.

It is interesting that after the English and French trajectories diverged during the fourteenth century, these two societies continued to oscillate with a phase shift. For example, the next period of instability in France began with the religious wars and ended with the Fronde. In England, instability began with the Great Revolution, continued with the Glorious Revolution, and ended with two aftershocks of Jacobite rebellions in Scotland. Therefore, the instability phase in France was a century between 1560 and 1660, whereas in England it occurred later, roughly between 1640 and 1740. This observation drives the final nail in the coffin of the climatic explanation of secular cycles. The cores of the two states, southern England and northern France, have very similar climates, and if it was climate change that was responsible for decline and collapse, then the two societies should have experienced it at the same time. Yet they did not. On the other hand, if cycles are generated internally, preservation of phase shift is precisely what we should expect.

WE HAVE THUS SEEN THAT THE very stability and internal peace that strong empires impose contain within it the seeds of chaos. Stability and internal peace bring prosperity; prosperity causes population increase. Demographic growth leads to overpopulation; overpopulation causes lower wages, higher land rents, and falling per-capita incomes for the commoners. At first, low wages and high rents bring unparalleled wealth to the upper classes, but as their numbers and appetites grow, they too begin to suffer from falling incomes. Declining standards of life breed discontent and strife. The elites turn to the state for employment and additional income, and drive up its expenditures at the same time that the tax revenues decline because of the impoverished state of the population. When the state’s finances collapse, it loses control of the army and police. Freed from all restraints, strife among the upper classes escalates into civil war, and the discontent among the lower classes explodes into popular rebellions.
