The lack of consensus on the need for national taxation had a direct effect on the ability of the state to wage the war against the English during the Hundred Years’ War. Philip VI (1328-50) and John II (1350-64) were unable to collect subsidies except in the time of outright conflict, and as a result faced increasing financial distress. As a result, France was always unprepared whenever military operations resumed after a truce. The military disasters of 1346 and 1347 (the defeat at Crécy, the loss of Calais) finally persuaded the Estates General in 1355 to 1356 to authorize necessary taxation, but now their attempts to impose taxes ran into resistance at the local level. In the end, the Estates were unable to produce the money they promised, and royal finances collapsed.

THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL TRENDS OF medieval France suggest the reasons for its fourteenth century collapse. Before examining the actual sequence of events leading to the fall, however, it is necessary to dispel one common myth: that France’s troubles were brought by the persistent conflict with the English, known as the Hundred Years’ War (1338-1453). First, the dates 1338 and 1453 are completely arbitrary. During this period, France and England were not at war continuously. There were several breaks in fighting, the longest of which was during 1389-1411. Before 1338, the French and the English fought a war as recently as in 1324-1327, and before that in 1294-1298. After 1453, there were wars in 1475 and 1489-1492. In fact, almost every generation of the French and the English fought against each other during their “Thousand Year War” between 1066 and 1815. Second, with only one quarter of the French population, England was simply not in the same league as far as military power is concerned. The English won several spectacular battles, but as we will shortly see, they were able to conquer and hold territory only when the French were mired in internecine fighting. As soon as the French got some semblance of internal unity, they immediately reconquered their territory. This happened twice; it was no fluke. Today historians emphasize that the main cause of the protracted warfare during 1338-1453 was not a dynastic conflict between the English and French kings, but rather the struggle between the great territorial magnates of France—the French king; the dukes of Brittany, Burgundy, and Guyenne (the latter was also the king of England); the counts of Flanders and Armagnac; and so on. While the magnates fought at the national level, noble factions slaughtered each other at the regional level, and peasants murdered lords and each other at the local level. As the great French historian Fernand Braudel said once, the Hundred Years’ War should more properly be called the “Hundred Years of Hostility.”
