The Templars originated as an order of monastic knights during the crusades. Unlike the Knights of St. John, who were also called the Hospitallers, the Templars were not known for charity and did not support hospitals, but set out to create a wealthy and powerful “transnational corporation.” Profiting from the tax-exempt status that the pope conferred on them during their crusading period, they lent money at lower interest rates than the Italian or Jewish bankers. They also served as bankers for the popes and lent large sums of money to Philip the Fair. On October 13, 1307, Philip ordered all Templars in France arrested and the order’s property seized. The Templars were accused of heresy, sorcery, and sodomy, and were subjected to the most-horrible tortures—racking, thumbscrews, and starvation. Their teeth and fingernails were pulled one by one, bones broken by the wedge, and feet roasted over flames. After 36 died in torture chambers and several by their own hand, the Grand Master Jacques de Molay and 122 other knights confessed to all the crimes. “And he would have confessed that he had slain God himself if they had asked him that,” wrote a chronicler. When Jacques de Molay was burned at the stake, he proclaimed his innocence and called down a terrible curse on the king and his descendants to the thirteenth generation. Within a year, Philip the Fair was dead. All of his 3 male heirs died, one after another, without leaving descendants, during the next 14 years. As one disaster after another fell on France during the fourteenth century, the legend of the Templar’s curse was remembered by people and grew in the retelling.

The methods used by Philip the Fair to fill his treasury, especially the recurrent use of war subsidies, incurred much resentment among the landowning and urban elites. The basic and essentially irresolvable problem was that the state competed with the elites for the shrinking surplus. In the first half of the fourteenth century, the kings began experiencing increasing resistance to taxation. For example, in 1314 Philip the Fair required a war subsidy for a campaign in Flanders. When last-minute negotiations averted the conflict, but the Royal officials nevertheless continued collecting a subsidy, a widespread rebellion erupted.
