Lands of marginal value for growing crops were abandoned or turned to pasture, which resulted in an overall increase in agricultural productivity. Overall food production declined, but the population plunged even faster, so that there was suddenly more than enough food to go around. People ate more meat and drank more beer and wine. The relative importance of bread in a person’s diet declined, and what bread was consumed was of higher quality. The French historian Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie relates how in 1338 the Provençal drovers working on their lord’s reserve ate a very crude kind of bread made mainly with barley. After the great plague, barley bread was considered to be good enough only for the sheep-dogs, whereas the laborers were entitled to wheat bread.

Economic trends during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries provide a brilliant confirmation of one aspect of the Malthusian theory—the effect of population pressure on food prices, real wages, and land rents. The population increase to 1300 and then decline, especially after 1348, brought about precisely the trends predicted by the theory. But the theory of Malthus makes another prediction, that when the economic situation experienced a drastic improvement after the Black Death, population numbers should respond by increasing. By 1380, a generation since the arrival of the Black Death, the economic indicators suggest greatly improved conditions of life for the lower classes. Yet population stagnated, and even declined further, contrary to what the Malthusian theory predicts. In France, the first signs of population increase appear only after 1450, and in England only toward 1500. What caused this prolonged—century-long—period of depression? It was not disease. Although the plague outbreaks continued throughout the fifteenth century, they were less frequent and milder than the outbreaks during the sixteenth century, when population again resumed growth. It is clear that something is wrong with the simple-minded version of the Malthusian theory. We need to look elsewhere to understand the hundred years between 1350 and 1450—to the dynamics of the ruling class and its relations with the state. WHO COMPRISED THE RULING CLASS OF medieval France? In agrarian societies, where most economic activity is concerned with growing crops and raising livestock, land is the chief means of production, and therefore the main form of wealth. Distribution of landed wealth within the society usually correlates very well with the distribution of political power, because wealth and power are akin to potential and kinetic kinds of energy in physics. Wealth, or rather income derived from it, is readily converted into power by buying influence or hiring retainers. Vice versa, political power brings with it the ability to acquire land, thus storing power for future use.
