Between 1300 and 1350, the social fabric of the French society began unraveling, first in the frontier regions, and later in the center. In Gascony, the houses of Armagnac and Foix clashed over the succession of the viscounty of Béarn. This feud was to go over the next two and a half centuries, and end only after the complete extinction of one of the houses. While the magnates fought over large stakes, private wars between lesser nobility proliferated in Gascony. Between 1290 and 1327, for example, at least 12 outbreaks of intra-elite violence are recorded in surviving sources.

At the opposite end of the kingdom, in the urbanized Flanders, tensions increased between the established urban patriciate, who were allied to the French crown, and the newly enriched bourgeoisie, who used the proletariat as shock troops in their struggle for power and status. In 1302, the struggle for power led to a full-blown rebellion in Bruges that spread to the whole of western Flanders. When Philip the Fair sent an army to pacify them, the Flemish infantry crushed the French aristocratic cavalry in the battle of Courtrai. In 1325-26, the urban communities of Flanders rose against their ruler, Count Louis of Nevers. In 1328, the French knights massacred the burgers at the field of Cassel, in a payback for the Courtrai debacle, and established French administration in Flanders. However, in 1337, the weavers of Ghent revolted yet again, and under the leadership of Jan van Arteveldt expelled Louis of Nevers. The Flemish made a commercial treaty with England and in 1340 recognized Edward III as their sovereign. The Flemish rebellion opened the northern route for the English invasion under Edward III, and was the first step in the sequence that lead directly to the battle of Crécy.

The north and east of France (the provinces of Picardy and Burgundy) were sites of the baronial movement against royal taxation during the reign of Louis X ( 1314-16). In the county of Artois, the revolt against the central power became complicated by internecine fighting between the adherents of Robert of Artois and those of his aunt Mahaut, who both claimed the county. Robert of Artois lost the struggle and eventually ended up in exile in England, where he joined his voice to those urging Edward III to war against France.

In 1341, Brittany descended into civil war when its duke John III died without direct heirs. The succession was disputed between two factions, Blois and Monfort. In the ensuing civil war the lesser nobles and the Celtic west supported the Monforts, while the great lords and French-speaking bourgeois of the east rallied to the Blois faction. The English supported the Monfort faction by launching a chevauchée (a “mounted raid” whose purpose was to lay country to waste) and besieging the important Breton strongholds of Rennes, Vannes, and Nantes.
