Although sharing common language and culture, before Muhammad the Arabs were never politically unified. The desert was divided up among a multitude of tribes who continuously warred against each other. (Most of the warfare took the form of livestock raiding and counter-raiding.) The constant state of conflict served to keep tribal asabiya high, but also prevented the tribes from uniting into a powerful confederation. If left alone, the nomads would never unite, and the state of intertribal warfare could persist indefinitely. In fact, this is precisely what happened to Arabia after the Islamic conquest exploded the imperial frontiers away from it—the desert again fragmented into a multitude of warring tribes. During the first six centuries of the common era, however, the Bedouins were not left alone. Their society was powerfully molded by two imperial frontiers—the Roman-Byzantine in the northwest and the Parthian-Persian in the northeast (and southeast, when the Persians annexed southern Arabia). In addition, there was a third imperial power, the Ethiopian kingdom of Axum, which impinged on the Arabs during the sixth century when it conquered Yemen. In 570, the year when Muhammad was born, an Ethiopian army even made an unsuccessful attempt to conquer his hometown, Mecca. As a result, the Arabs were “squeezed” by empires from all directions.

Imperial pressures took many of the same forms that we saw on the Rhine frontier. For example, using diplomacy and generous subsidies, the Byzantines engineered the rise of a powerful tribal confederation, the Ghassanids, on their Palestinian frontier (in the area corresponding, roughly, to the modern Jordan and Syria). The Ghassanid Kingdom protected the Byzantine frontier from desert raiders, and provided mounted auxiliary troops for the Byzantine-Persian wars. But the side effect, just as happened in northwest Europe, was to introduce into Arabia the political techniques for putting together and holding together a supra-tribal organization. Similar developments took place along the Euphrates, where Persians encouraged the formation of the frontier Lakhmid state with the capital in Hira. Another imperial influence was the demand for luxury trade generated by the affluent civilized societies. Two products of southern Arabia in particular were much in demand, frankincense and myrrh. Profits from the caravan trade could be taxed, generating cash—“the sinews of state,” as the ancient Greeks were fond of saying. The final ingredient in the geopolitical matrix surrounding Arabia was that each of the neighboring empires possessed its own brand of monotheistic religion: Christianity for the Byzantines and Ethiopians, and Zoroastrianism for the Persians. Within Arabia, the influence of Judaism was strong. Many Arabs in Syria converted to Nestorian Christianity, and some tribes practiced Judaism, although many Bedouins during Muhammad’s time still followed polytheistic tribal cults.
