Pre-industrial societies had their own “mass media.” A face of the king on a coin was a powerful visual image that reached all his subjects who handled money, and played an important role in creating a national identity. The primate of a national church could instruct parish priests to deliver sermons on a specific topic, thus reaching multitudes of illiterate peasants. Still, important landmarks were passed when political pamphlets became common in the sixteenth century, broadsheet newspapers in the nineteenth century, and the TV became ubiquitous in the twentieth. Having your president talk to you in your home is a powerful method for mobilizing mass support for the state’s policies. Modern nationalism is orders of magnitude more efficient at reaching citizens than what was possible in premodern times. A tightly integrated premodern nation, such as the Romans of the early Republic, could number tens of thousands of citizens, perhaps a hundred thousand. In empires that encompassed millions or tens of millions of subjects, it was inevitable that only the elites would be able to share in a common identity. Modern technology changed that and made possible the integration of tens and even hundreds of millions people into cohesive nations. It has also decoupled geographic and information /symbolic spaces. One does not need to be physically close to a metaethnic frontier to be under its influence. An Arab community in Detroit might now be more closely integrated with their coreligionists thousands of miles away in Lebanon than with a Polish working-class neighborhood a mile away.

Mass media has been with us for some time, and social scientists have constructed theories of its effects on the dynamics of modern societies. Techniques for polling public attitudes and, on the darker side, manipulating public opinion are becoming increasingly sophisticated. Because communications technology continues to develop at such a fast pace, however, these theories have had short shelf life.

Mass media can be viewed as having simple hierarchical structure. There is a center, where news, opinions, and entertainment are produced; and then there are the masses who consume the information products. The reality is at least a bit more complicated because typically, there are several centers—national TV channels, major newspapers, and wire services. This alone, however, does not change the hierarchical nature of the system. Different information providers influence each other in complex nonlinear ways, but they still constitute a tiny information elite. The huge majority of citizens even in the most democratic countries are merely passive recipients. Or, rather, have been passive recipients, because the structure of the world’s information space is undergoing a radical change.
