Perhaps the best illustration is the Second Punic War. Hannibal was a brilliant general and inspired leader. With his heterogeneous army, half of which was brave but undisciplined Gauls, he smashed one Roman army after another—at the Ticinus, at the Trebia, at lake Trasimene, and the worst one, at Cannae. Fifty thousand Romans died at Cannae, one third of the senate was wiped out. “No other nation in the world,” says Livy, “could have suffered so tremendous a series of disasters and not been overwhelmed.”

What distinguished the Romans from their adversaries was that they were able to overcome such disasters. The Romans knew in a culturally rooted subconscious way that life could only be ensured by willingness to die. The Roman general and later dictator Sulla told his troops once, “You will be the safer the less you spare yourself.” Cicero proclaimed in one of his speeches, “That which appears most splendid is that done with a great and exalted spirit and in disregard of the concerns of mortal life.”

Perhaps the ultimate expression of this sacrificial spirit was the Roman ritual of “devotion.” If a battle was going against the Romans, the Roman commander could devote himself and the enemy army to the gods of the underworld. The basic idea was to place a potent curse on oneself and carry it in the midst of the enemy, thus saving the Roman legions. According to Livy, the ritual involved standing on a spear and repeating the following words: “Janus, Jupiter, Father Mars, Quirinus, Bellona, Lares, new gods, native gods, deities who have power over us and other enemies, and gods of the underworld: I supplicate and revere you, I seek your favor and beseech you, that you prosper the might and victory of the Roman people and afflict the enemies of the Roman people with terror, dread, and death.” This was the formula pronounced, for example, by Publius Decius Mus in 295 when the Roman army was on the point of breaking before the onslaught of a combined force of Gauls and Samnites. “After ritual prayers he added that he was driving before him dread, slaughter, and bloodshed, the wrath of the gods above and below, and would pollute with a deadly curse the standards, missiles, and arms of the enemy; that the place of his own destruction would mark that of Gauls and Samnites. With these imprecations upon himself and the enemy he galloped his horse into the Gallic lines, where he saw they were thickest, and threw himself on the enemy weapons to meet his death.”
