The length of the second defensive line was more than 600 miles, a Russian equivalent of the Great Wall of China, fulfilling the same function albeit with very different construction methods. The investment of labor was enormous. Tens of thousands of people, mostly drawn from the frontier population, worked on the construction. The frontiersmen expended a remarkable effort, but it could not have happened without the full backing of the central government, which founded fortified towns on the steppe, recruited the garrisons from the central areas of Muscovy, and provided overall organization. The key role of the central government is highlighted by the occasions when the defenses failed, which always happened either when the authorities were preoccupied with the war on the western frontier or during the Time of Troubles (when the central government collapsed). In 1571, the Tatars broke through the defenses and succeeded in burning Moscow. The last time the Tatars managed to reach Moscow and burn its suburbs was in 1592. Successful raids reached the Muscovite heartland in the first half of the seventeenth century, but after the 1650s the Tatar raids were no longer able to penetrate the defense lines, which by that time had moved even farther south.

The organization of the frontier service was perfected during the sixteenth century. The first line of defenses consisted of Cossack patrols deep into the steppe. In one typical technique, a pair of sentries stationed themselves near a tall tree in the steppe. One Cossack climbed the tree to kept watch, while the other remained ready to ride back immediately upon sight of the enemy. The watchman, after climbing down, followed the Tatars to determine the direction of their movement. This work was very dangerous, because the Tatars hunted the sentries, both to prevent them from raising the alarm and to gain information about the current state of defenses. A surviving letter to the garrison commander at Novgorod-Seversky tells about the misadventures of one such lookout, Yakush, a Cossack from Putivl. In the fall of 1523, Yakush was ordered to guide a company of gentry servitors pursuing some Tatars escaping with loot and captives after a raid. The Russian detachment caught up with the Tatars and succeeded in freeing the captives. Yakush then guided everybody back to the frontier, after which he returned to his lookout station on the steppe. Unfortunately, the Tatars, annoyed at having to return empty-handed, decided to go back and search the area where the Cossacks kept watch. They caught Yakush and carried him away to the khan in Crimea. The subsequent fate of Yakush is unknown, but this little bit of recorded history gives us a glimpse of the everyday life on the edge, with its constant threat of the Tatar raids, the “posses” organized to pursue the robbers, and the precarious existence of the Cossacks serving as the frontier lookouts and guides.
