The office of the constable was a very lucrative one—he was paid 2,000 francs (livres) per month in peace, and upon the outbreak of hostilities a sum equal to one day’s pay of all men at arms under contract. He was also a source of extensive patronage, because he controlled recruitment, provisioning, and other arrangements for war. Multitudes of nobles, whose landed income was insufficient to support themselves, depended on income that it was in the power of the constable to bestow on them. Conversely, all those who were excluded from the trough hated the constable and wished for his downfall. By striking the blow that removed the favorite, Charles the Bad instantly made himself the leader of the growing dissident faction, who blamed the Valois kings for misgovernment and military reverses. Normandy, where Charles the Bad had extensive properties and close connections to the local nobility, was virtually in rebellion, refusing to pay taxes and contribute men to the army. The inability of the crown to get any funds from this wealthy province was a significant contribution to the collapse of the royal finances.

The assassination of the constable was just the first act in the play of revenge tragedy. One murder led to another in a spiraling pattern of revenge and counter-revenge. In April 1356, the dauphin was entertaining Charles of Navarre and the leading Norman nobles at a banquet in Rouen (the capital of Normandy), when John II with many armed followers burst in. Despite the dauphin begging his father not to dishonor him by committing violence upon his guests, the king ordered the arrest of Charles of Navarre and all others present who participated in the murder of the constable. He himself handled Jean d‘Harcourt, one of the chief assassins, so roughly that he tore his doublet from collar to belt. The next morning, Jean d’Harcourt and three other Norman nobles were taken to their execution, when the king, who apparently could not wait any longer to assuage his thirst for vengeance, suddenly halted the procession in the open field and ordered the prisoners to be beheaded on the spot. Harcourt’s death was particularly painful, because the substitute executioner was very inept, and took six blows to sever his neck.

The execution of Jean d’Harcourt and others was not a particularly intelligent thing to do, because Jean had three brothers and nine children married to various noble families of northern France. The King alienated a whole segment of nobility, without eliminating the main malefactor—Charles of Navarre, who was imprisoned in the Châtelet in Paris, and later played his typically disruptive Bad role in the collapse of 1356-60.
