So far I have focused exclusively on the distribution of wealth. Another important aspect of the model is income. Does wealth inequality translate into income inequality? To answer this question, I had to add to the model a productive component. Land by itself does not generate income; it has to be worked by somebody to produce food (one also needs seed, agricultural implements, and so on; but let’s ignore such complications—again, progress in theory building is made by adding one thing at a time, not by jumping into the messy reality with all of its glorious complexities). It turns out that whether wealth inequality gets translated into income inequality, or not, depends on the population density—the size of potential workforce in relation to the amount of land that can be cultivated.

For a rich family to translate its large wealth into extra income, it must hire the poor ones to work its land, because there is a limit to how much land the family members can cultivate themselves. If there is more land than available workers can cultivate, some land will lie fallow and not generate any income. But even the land for which hired help can be found will also bring only a minimal profit to the landowner, because the wages will be high (because of a labor shortage). Alternatively, rather than hire workers to work their land, the rich might rent it to them—let them cultivate it in return for a fee. Again, however, because land is in greater supply than potential renters, the landowners will be forced to rent it at a very low rate. As a result, the distribution of income will be less extreme than that of wealth. The rich will not be able to fully use their wealth. The poor will be able to retain the bulk of what they produce with their labor, even though they do not own the land.

The situation changes dramatically when the population grows to the point where there is an oversupply of labor. Now wealthy landowners can get away with paying low wages, just enough to make sure that their hired help does not starve. The poor, who do not own enough land to feed their families, are forced to work for minimal wages (or rent the lands of the rich at usurious rates). Furthermore, because there are more people than are needed to work the land, some of the poor will be unemployed. They will face a stark choice of gradually selling what land remains in their hands to feed their families or starving. Thus, the process of wealth concentration will accelerate. Not only will the rich now get huge incomes from their property, they will be able to use some of this income to augment their wealth even further. Overpopulation is a mighty force driving economic inequality.
