Other external factors can advance or delay the onset of crisis. States do not exist in isolation; they are surrounded by potential enemies or prey. External warfare can have a large effect on how the secular cycle develops. We saw how the loss of French territories in 1453 immediately precipitated crisis in England. Territorial gain, on the other hand, can postpone the crisis very substantially. During the Romanov dynasty (1613-1917), Russia enormously expanded its territory. The newly conquered steppe regions were sparsely populated and could accept massive inflows of colonizers, which relieved population pressure in the core regions. Nobles also profited from this colonization, by acquiring estates in the new lands. The nobility numbers expanded, but slower than the numbers of peasants. As a result, during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, the Russian society had a tiny ruling class—only about 1 percent of the total population, which explains the extremely long period, over two centuries, of internal stability. There were peasant uprisings, which were handily suppressed, and palace coups when the upper nobility wanted to change an emperor, but nothing like the time of troubles before the Romanov era. Only in the nineteenth century, after the colonization of the new lands was over, did the usual trends toward overpopulation and, particularly, elite overproduction assert themselves again. The result was the revolutions of 1905 and 1917, the civil war, and Stalin’s purges.

When cycles are generated internally within a dynamical system, we should not expect rises and falls to succeed each other with a high degree of regularity, for the same reason that weather systems—and forest fires—are so difficult to predict. First, there is the curious property of nonlinear dynamical systems that mathematicians call chaos. Chaotic systems oscillate in a seemingly erratic but nevertheless completely deterministic fashion. Second, and more important, is that societies are not closed systems—they are affected and afflicted with a variety of external forces, such as climatic change, the arrival of a pandemic, or the invasion of an army. As a result, some cycles will take longer to complete, and others will run their course faster. Sometimes a cycle might even be completely aborted, if a Chinggis Khan or a Timur arrives with a huge army and piles the heads, of commoner and noble alike, in a huge pyramid.

Chapter 10

The Matthew Principle

Why the Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Poorer
