The hecatombs inflicted on the French nobility during the second stage of the Hundred Years’ War were even greater than those of the first, especially when considered in proportional terms. The worst disaster was undoubtedly Agincourt, where 10,000 French nobles perished. Among the fallen were more than 10 dukes and counts, 120 barons, and 1,500 knights. Earlier, several thousands of French nobles participated in the crusade to free Hungary from the Turks, where they perished at the battle of Nicopolis (1396). The Dauphinist casualties at the battle of Verneuil (1424) were about 7,000, although only a part of them were French. (There was a big Scot contingent fighting on the French side.) And casualties in large battles were only a part of the total drain on the French nobility. Untold thousands lost their lives in the civil wars and small-scale military operations (sieges, skirmishes) against the English. Massacres, such as that of Armagnacs in Paris (1418), became commonplace. King Henry V of England (as well as other military leaders of the time) was notorious for the atrocities that he routinely committed. The best known one is the killing of the prisoners that he ordered on the field of Agincourt, but there were many others. For example, when he took the Armagnac castle of Rougemont (1421), he hanged the entire garrison. Those defenders, who escaped and were caught later, were drowned. (Did he run out of rope?) When dispossessed nobles in Normandy persisted in using guerilla tactics, the English called them “brigands” and hanged them when they caught them. Other atrocities include the cold-blooded butchering of 2,000 men, women, and children in Caen in 1417, and Henry’s refusal to allow 12,000 poor folk driven out of the besieged and starving Rouen to leave. He forced them to stay in the city ditch, where most of them died of inclement climate (it was winter) and starvation. The last two examples refer to commoners, but they illustrate how callous the fighting men were about taking life, and the nobility were often treated in the same way as commoners (except when there was a hope of ransom). Both commoners and nobles suffered from the casual attitude to taking life, but because the nobles were the military class, they paid a disproportionate price.
