In the 1970s, the Italian political system was reformed, with the center delegating unprecedented powers and resources to the new regional governments. The reform gave political scientists, such as Putnam, a wonderful opportunity to study how the political culture of a region affects the institutional performance of the regional government. What we have here is a kind of political experiment. The same structure of regional government is imposed in all different provinces of Italy, from Piemonte in the north to Calabria in the south. All regional governments are given similar amounts of funds. Political scientists then observe how well each government operates during the next two decades. Any differences they detect should be due to the political culture of the region.

How can one measure “institutional performance,” that is, how well regions are governed? Asabiya (or social capital) is the key. However, capacity for collective action is a complex, multifaceted property of society, and therefore we cannot expect a single way to measure it perfectly. Putnam and his co-workers, however, came beautifully close. They chose 12 indicators, ranging from measures of operation efficiency such as bureaucratic responsiveness and budget promptness to a quantification of services provided to the public, such as the number of daycare centers and family clinics. The researchers at first had doubts about whether these very different indicators would add up to a coherent set, in the sense that they would measure the same underlying property of the regional society. After they analyzed their data, however, they saw that different indicators were all telling pretty much the same story—if a region was high in one indicator, it was likely to be high in others. It seemed to them that the indicators were getting at some basic feature of social life, which meant that they could be combined into a single measure of institutional performance. Another indication that the combined measure got at something real was its temporal stability. Relative rankings of regions stayed pretty much the same for the period studied, from the early 1970s to the mid-1980s.

When Putnam and co-workers finished estimating the institutional performance for each Italian region, they saw a remarkable pattern. There was very strong north-south gradient in how well regions were governed. The regions in the Po Valley such as Emilia-Romagna and Lombardia were consistently at the top of rankings in institutional performance, whereas southern regions, such as Campania (the region around Naples), Calabria (the “toe” of the Italian boot), and Sicily were at the bottom.
