IS THE E.U. A NEW KIND OF EMPIRE? Will the emerging competition between the U.S. and China take the same forms as the struggles of great powers in history? Has the Russian imperial nation exhausted its asabiya? Will another mighty caliphate emerge in the Middle East during the twenty-first century? What does the recent decline of asabiya in the U.S., discussed in Chapter 13, portend for the future of the American empire? This chapter offers more questions than answers.

It is important not to overestimate our understanding even of simple agrarian societies. Applying history’s lessons to the present day presents even more difficulties because we live in a different world from the one of the Assyrians, the Romans, and the Mongols. Abundant food and energy, rapidly developing technology and science, mass media, the World Wide Web, and the mobile phone make any direct comparisons between historical agrarian empires and the modern industrial states problematic. On the other hand, modernity did not remake human nature. We still make babies the old-fashioned way, we kill each other in individual and collective conflicts, and feelings of group loyalty, as well as intolerance toward strangers, continue to hold sway over us.

Is it possible to design institutions that will enhance asabiya—the social capital of which Putnam has written? Or, at least, can we design societies in such a way that asabiya is not constantly being degraded? Do humans always need the threat of imminent danger from some outside enemy to cooperate effectively? Some might conclude from my book that the principle of asabiya implies that for all humans to cooperate we would need to be attacked by extraterrestrials.

Even though modern societies have solved the problem of feeding the population, they are still susceptible to the elite overproduction problem. Will intra-elite competition escalate into violence and cause Western states to collapse even in the presence of democratic institutions, designed to channel conflict into peaceful forms? Can we find a middle way between redistributive state socialism and letting the Matthew principle run amok, creating inequality and undermining cooperation?

The life cycles of imperial nations as I believe the science of cliodynamics defines them have not preordained what will happen tomorrow to the dominant empires of our time, but they do map the critical factors of their past and guide us toward the critical choices we will have in the next generation, century, and millennium. I hope that the description I have provided of these life cycles and the research that attends them will make the importance of cooperation to the long-term prosperity of humanity clear. E pluribus unum.

Notes
