In the nineteenth century, Austria was undoubtedly a member of the great powers club, but it was probably the weakest—not because of lack of territory or manpower, but because of the centrifugal tendencies of various nationalities within the empire. The main problem was the Hungarians. As noted before, any political construction that contains two distinct imperial nations is unstable. Either there must be amalgamation into one ethnic core nation, or separation. During the reign of Charles V (1519-58), the Habsburg Empire had two cores, the Castilians and the Austrians. This arrangement was not workable, and the empire peacefully separated when Charles abdicated. The Spanish part went to Charles’s son Philip II, and the German to his brother Ferdinand I. When Hungary was reconquered in 1699, the Habsburg Empire again enfolded two imperial nations. The Hungarians chafed under the Austrian tutelage. Even though the Austrians tried to propitiate them by reformulating the empire as the double monarchy of Austria-Hungary, and assigning such Slavic lands as Slovakia and Croatia to the Hungarian crown, it was not enough to satisfy the Hungarian ruling class, who still dreamed of past imperial glories. That the Austrians and Hungarians were born on the opposite sides of the metaethnic frontier was also a factor, even though that was centuries in the past. Not only did the Hungarians refuse to assimilate to German, as the logical common language of the empire, they embarked on a program of assimilating their subject Slav populations to the Hungarian. The tension between the two nations encouraged centrifugal tendencies on the part of smaller nationalities of the empire. For example, Hungarian persecution of the Slovak language and culture played an important role in feeding the nascent national identity of this small Slavic people. In any case, the nineteenth century was the age of nationalism, and this ideology infected all subject nations of the Habsburg Empire—Italians, Czechs, and South Slavs—with the disastrous consequences for the internal cohesion of the state. The end came when the Habsburgs overextended themselves with the occupation of Bosnia in the late nineteenth century. It was formally annexed in 1908, which led directly to the fateful shots fired by Gavrilo Princip in Sarajevo six years later, World War I, the Austrian defeat, and dismemberment at the hands of the victors.
