It is amazing how closely the events leading to the second crisis reproduced those that ended in the crisis of the 1350s. As before, the first sign of the impending disaster was the appearance of vast mobs of impoverished nobles looking for military employment. In the fall of 1386, between 10,000 and 20,000 nobles flocked to L’Écluse, where preparations to invade England were under way. (The invasion never took place.) In 1396, thousands of French knights went on a crusade against the Turks, only to perish at the battle of Nicopolis. The nobility again started fragmenting into feuding factions. During the minority of Charles VI in the 1380s, factions began crystallizing around his uncles, the “princes of the lilies”—the dukes of Anjou, Burgundy, and Berry (the same one who commissioned the beautiful illustrated manuscript The Very Rich Hours of the Duke of Berry). These princes impoverished the treasury by pocketing the taxes collected in the territories over which they had control (their appanages) and by diverting government funds for personal projects. The political program of the duke of Burgundy was to use the resources of France to build an independent principality in Burgundy and the Low Countries. Louis of Anjou had dynastic ambitions in Italy and tried to get the treasury to underwrite the costs of his Italian expedition. Another faction was the “Marmousets” (grotesques, gargoyles—so called by their enemies because of their bourgeois origins), a group that included high civil officials and military leaders close to the previous king, Charles the Wise. This faction was the only one that worried about the common good. The Marmousets’ objectives were relieving the burden on the taxpayers while building up the resources in the royal coffers.

During the 1390s, the various groupings of the power elites gradually consolidated into two opposing factions: one led by the power-hungry duke of Burgundy, the other by the brother of the king, Louis of Orléans, when he came of age. Few realized at the time that this factional rivalry would plunge France into an extremely bloody civil war that would last for 30 years.

Consistent state policy was impossible while various factions contended for power. The central government was also weakened by the intermittent insanity of the king. When the king was incapacitated, the Burgundian faction was ascendant. During his more lucid periods, the Orléanists held the power. The fragile consensus on taxation, achieved in 1360, was lost. Some taxes were repealed, such as the hearth tax that so displeased the landowning nobility. Others (sale taxes, the salt gabelle) were first annulled, but then immediately re-imposed, causing discontent and even brief rebellions that had to be crushed by force.
