What about that other familiar social phenomenon in southern Italy? The existence of criminal organizations in the region preceded Marlon Brando. Sicilian Mafia and its sister organizations, Neapolitan camorra and Calabrian ’ndrangheta, have been a continuous presence in Mezzogiorno, whereas the north does not have anything similar. Where did these criminal organizations come from and why do they persist? Social scientists (for example, Diego Gambetta) have argued that Mafia arises as a social response to the pervasive lack of trust. Where public trust is scarce, there is a high demand for protection. Mafiosi are private entrepreneurs who supply protection, no matter how inefficiently.

The disparity in economic development between the Italian north and south is striking. Today the south is rural and poor, whereas the north is urban, industrialized, and wealthy. Few people realize just how well off the Italian north is, because when we see economic statistics for Western Europe, they are typically broken down by country, rather than by regions. Italy as a whole is in the middle of the pack, but its northern regions, such as Lombardia and Emilia-Romagna, are at the very top of the list. The overall rank for Italy is pulled down by its poor Mezzogiorno. Yet only a century ago there was practically no wealth differential between the north and south.

What is particularly interesting is that the asabiya matrix was already in place in the north, even a century ago. Following Italian unification in 1860 and until 1920, big differences existed between the north and south in Putnam’s measures of social capital such as membership in mutual-aid societies and cooperatives, and strength of national political parties. But there were no comparable differences in economic development. The economic trajectories of the north and south began diverging only after 1920. This observation suggests that the difference in social capital today is not simply a result of the north being wealthier and more developed. The causation actually goes the other way: The north is more economically developed because it has more social capital.

How is social capital translated into economic capital? Francis Fukuyama (of The End of History fame) argued recently in Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity that social trust is a key factor in economic growth. The importance of the rise of the modern corporation for economic growth is rarely disputed. So too, few would doubt that when it comes to surviving in the highly competitive global economy, it is the large-scale business organizations—the giant international corporations—that do best. But the large size of these business entities is also a liability.
