The fifth century saw that kind of urban class struggle between the wealthy aristocrats and the impoverished commons as well as internecine rivalry among the Roman aristocratic factions, and rebellion of the provincial Latin subjects. The fifth-century crisis, in fact, affected not only Rome, but the whole of Tyrrhenian Italy. The internal weakness also invited attack by the noncivilized tribes inhabiting the Apennines. Rome was subjected to raids and territorial encroachment by the Italic hill tribes of Sabines, Volsci, and Aequi. And the war against the Etruscans continued to flare up periodically. On top of incessant warfare, overpopulation led to recurrent epidemics and subsistence crises.

In 463 B.C., reports Livy, “In both town and country there was a great deal of sickness. Cattle suffered as much as men, and the incidence of disease was increased by overcrowding, as farmers together with their livestock had been taken into the city for fear of raids. The smell of this motley collection of animals and men was distressing to city folk, who were not accustomed to it; the farmers and yokels, packed as they were into inadequate quarters, suffered no less from the heat and lack of sleep, while attendance upon the sick, or mere contact of any kind, continuously spread the infection. The unhappy people were already at the end of their tether, when report suddenly arrived that a combined army of Aequians and Volscians ... were overruning the countryside.”

The invaders swept into the territory of Rome, “where farmlands needed no enemy to make them desolate. In all the countryside they found not a single man, armed or unarmed; there was no sign of defenders, not a trace of cultivation.... In the city, the consul Aebutius had died; his colleague Servilius was in a lingering state, almost despaired of. Most of the leading men, the majority of the Senate, almost anybody of military age were down with the disease.... Her strength gone and with no one to lead her, Rome lay helpless.

“The Senate despairing of human aid, turned people to their prayers, bidding them to go with their wives and children and supplicate heaven for a remission of their sorrows. It was official command, but no more than what each was impelled to do by his own distress: Every shrine was packed; in every temple women lay prostrate, their hair sweeping the floor, praying for the angry gods to grant them pardon and to put an end to the plague.” Dyonisius writes that during the plague of 463 B.C., the corpses of the very poor had to be thrown into the Tiber, and again in 451, when the corpses were thrown into the sewers as well.
