I HAVE ATTEMPTED TO SHOW THAT the dominant factor in the development of the Muscovite society was the frontier. The pressure from the steppe nomads molded Muscovy’s institutions and culture. I propose that a causal connection exists between the frontier position of Muscovy and its transformation into a strongly centralizing state, in which different social classes cooperated in territorial defense and expansion. This is a hypothesis, because a well-developed theory cannot be based on a single case, but let us continue the exploration of this idea for a while yet, before a more comprehensive test is taken.

So far my focus has been on cooperation at the local level. Cossacks, gentry servitors, peasants, and government officials worked together to defend a particular segment of the steppe frontier. Incidentally, given this social background, it is easier to see why Ermak’s Cossacks were able to withstand the Tatar onslaught at the battle of Sibir without breaking down. However, our ultimate goal is to understand how large territorial empires can be assembled and held together. Certainly, coercion from the center is one aspect of the answer. But, again, willing cooperation between the peripheries and the center makes it much easier for an empire to extend its sway. It is a mistake to think that empires are based solely on force—the largest ones always involved some degree of cooperation (and when cooperation declined, the empires crumbled). The Russian Empire was not an exception.

Whereas the forest-steppe fault line in eastern Europe divided the nomads and the farmers from each other, it integrated people located on the same side of the frontier. Farming people inhabiting the territory of the former Kievan Russia spoke very similar eastern Slavic languages (dialects, really) and belonged to the same branch of Christianity. Small cultural differences resulting from slight dialectal dissimilarities were dwarfed by the presence of the very different “other” on the other side of the frontier: Turkic, nomadic, Muslim. Cooperation is much easier to achieve among culturally similar people with similar goals, values, and behaviors.
