The same imbalance exists with epidemics. AIDS had the potential to be another Black Death, if not for the advances in molecular biology and medicine. If not for molecular genetics, we would not even know why we are dying. But just knowing the cause (even without a cure) allowed societies to control the spread of the epidemic. In Africa, AIDS did result in a pandemic—that is still growing. In fact, several African countries have experienced during the late twentieth century what appears to be a classical demographic-structural collapse, in which overpopulation led to state breakdown and bloody, even genocidal civil wars (for instance, Somalia and Rwanda).

The prevalence of liberal democracy today also distinguishes us from the agrarian societies studied by historians. At least in theory, democracy should channel intra-elite competition into less-violent forms. By allowing orderly and peaceful transfer of power, modern democratic societies should prove to be more resistant to state collapse. However, because true liberal democracies have been around only for a century or so (it is only in the early twentieth century that the suffrage began encompassing more than 50 percent of the adult population), they have not yet been around long enough to experience a secular cycle.

The world has changed. Several cause-effect chains, operating in agrarian societies, have been completely ruptured, or at least transformed in a big way by the industrial revolution. On the other hand, many of the economic and social trends during the last half-century or so have been moving together in highly suggestive ways. For example, we know that twentieth century was an era of inflation, which came after a period of relatively stable prices (Fischer’s equilibrium of the Victorian era). Most people tend to explain persistent inflation as just another characteristic of modernity, but every previous secular wave, without exceptions, saw a “price revolution” that ended up in crisis.

A rise in crime rates has afflicted Western countries since 1960. It has been observed not only in America, but also in Great Britain, Germany, Italy, and the Scandinavian countries. This rising trend is especially baffling to the experts because for at least a century before 1960, crime statistics in all of these countries had been declining. Could it be that crime statistics reflect an increase of some sort of social pressure? In past secular cycles, we typically see a rise in crime rates in the pre-crisis period.
