In the final analysis, although they made valuable contributions to the debate, sociobiologists failed to explain human ultrasociality In the last chapter of The Selfish Gene, Dawkins himself acknowledged, “Kin selection and selection in favor of reciprocal altruism may have acted on human genes to produce many of our basic psychological attributes and tendencies. These ideas are plausible as far as they go, but I find that they do not begin to square up to the formidable challenge of explaining culture, cultural evolution, and the immense differences between human cultures around the world.”

This is where matters stood about a decade ago, during the mid-1990s. Mainstream theories, rational choice in social sciences and natural selection in biological sciences, could not explain cooperation among large numbers of unrelated individuals. According to the scientific understanding of the time, human ultrasociality was, we’re sorry, impossible. Anomalies such as, for example, World War I were generally ignored. Some scientists tried to explain such instance of mass cooperation away. Perhaps enlisting in the army was an atavistic cooperative impulse, which evolved by means of kin selection when primordial humans lived in bands of relatives, and now was somehow triggered by nationalistic war propaganda. In other words, volunteers behaved in truly irrational fashion, both in the technical and common senses of the word; they were somehow “fooled.” Or perhaps they were purposefully fooled—manipulated by the Machiavellian elites into spending their blood for the sake of the capitalists’ profits.

Another group of scientists neither ignored nor tried to explain away such anomalies. Working in a truly interdisciplinary fashion, these biologists, anthropologists, sociologists, and economists finally cracked the puzzle of human ultrasociality. Not all of the loose ends have been tidied up yet, but the general outlines of the answer are becoming quite clear.

BEFORE WE TRY TO EXPLAIN SOMETHING, we need to assure ourselves that the phenomenon to be explained is real. The wave of volunteering at the beginning of World War I is a striking example of human capacity to sacrifice self-interest, but it is a single and highly complex event, open for diverse interpretations. The best way to proceed in science is through experiment—a study performed to verify or falsify a hypothesis while controlling or even manipulating external conditions. During the 1990s, several economists, most notably Ernst Fehr at the University of Zurich and his colleagues, decided to test the assumptions of the rational choice theory experimentally. This was a significant break within the scientific culture of economics, where most researchers had either constructed abstract and rigorous mathematical models or applied statistical methods to huge data sets on things such as inflation and economic growth.
