CAN WE GAIN A GLIMPSE INTO the life on the Iberian frontier? Here is the story of one small episode in this centuries-long conflict from the chronicle of Alphonso VII, as retold by the historian James Powers in A Society Organized for War. “In 1132 a small army of Christian soldiers advanced northwest along the road to Córdoba, offering periodic shouts and chants in the manner of armies attempting to keep up their spirits as they proceed through the enemy territory. Outside the Iberian Peninsula in the twelfth century, this force would have to be regarded as remarkable in every respect. The column consisted of both mounted and foot troops, they were situated over four hundred kilometers from their home base, and they consisted largely of the municipal militias of two towns, Segovia and Avila, operating on a campaign they had chosen to initiate. They had passed three mountain ranges and they moved far from home on a daring raid into the heart of Almoravid Spain. As they ranged over the countryside seeking targets, a scouting party dispatched earlier to search for sources of booty rejoined the main body. It brought sobering intelligence information : a Muslim force commanded by the Almoravid prince Tashfin of Córdoba had been spotted encamped in the vicinity, probably dispatched in pursuit of their own squadrons. A more timorous force of skirmishers and raiders might well have sought the nearest ford in the Guadalquivir River and made its way back to the Trans-Duero region whence it mustered. However, these troops were no panicky amateurs, prone to flight without consideration of the risk of being overtaken and routed. Like trained professionals, they instead sought out the enemy army.

“The leaders demonstrated initiative and combativeness. Frontier warfare in Iberia included taking risks, and sound strategy dictated a direct assault on the opponent’s force, especially if any kind of surprise could be achieved. Altering plans and direction and invoking ‘the God of Heaven and Earth, Holy Mary, and Saint James’ for their protection; the town militia undertook to search out the enemy army with whom they now shared the Campo de Lucena. In time, estimating that they were close to the Almoravid position, the militias encamped and divided into two detachments. The entire cavalry force and approximately one half of its infantry moved out on reconnaissance to locate the Muslims, while the other half of the foot soldiers remained at the campsite to guard the baggage and supplies.
