WHEREAS FRANCE BEGAN ITS CLIMB out of the medieval depression c.1450, in England the time of troubles dragged on for another half century. In fact, in the second half of the fifteenth century, England saw the worst period of instability in its history. The period opened with Cade’s rebellion of 30,000 men in Kent and Sussex in 1450. A dreary civil war between the Lancastrians and Yorkists dragged on between 1455 and 1485. Henry VII Tudor (1485-1509) had to deal with a series of revolts, conspiracies, and pretenders. Only after the last pretender, Perkin Warbeck, was defeated in 1497 had England finally become pacified.

The divergence between the French and English trajectories can be traced to the middle of the fourteenth century. The Great Famine and the Black Death had the same effect on both countries: a disproportionate die-off of the producing population leading to a dangerous disbalance between too few peasants and too many lords. However, in 1356, the English won the victory at Poitiers and captured the French king. On the eve of the battle, the finances of the English crown were on the verge of collapse. Edward III imposed heavy taxes, causing widespread resentment, and borrowed like a fiend. His default on the loans from the Lombards caused the collapse of several Italian banks. The great victory at Poitiers brought with it increased legitimacy, which helped to quiet the grumbling over taxation, and, more importantly, a windfall of ransoms from the French king and nobles. Thus, precisely the same event that tipped France into the tailspin allowed the English a respite from their own troubles. During the next century, England continued shipping off the excess of its nobility to France, where they plundered with the free companies, or carved temporary domains for themselves, or simply were killed. The surplus noble thugs contributed to the chaos in France, but their absence from England allowed preservation of fragile balance within the island. This export of instability, however, did not solve the root causes that generated it. England experienced a great peasant rebellion and a change of dynasty at the end of the fourteenth century. But these upheavals were not enough to solve the problem of elite overproduction.
