The U.S. also has complex power structure, especially when we consider it as a global power. Although the internal arrangements of the U.S. are reasonably simple—it directly controls the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and dependent territories (such as Puerto Rico and a number of Pacific islands), its external influence reaches across the globe. It militarily occupies Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. It has a strong degree of indirect control via heavy military presence (for example, in South Korea) or economic subsidies (Israel). Given the economic and diplomatic help that Israel gets from the U.S., it is essentially an American client state. The U.S. wields a great deal of political control by means of such organizations as NATO. Finally, using a variety of overt and covert means, the U.S. has been largely successful in installing friendly governments, traditionally in Latin America, more recently in countries such as Georgia and Ukraine. As one Latin American joke goes, “Do you know why there are no coup c’états in America? Because they don’t have American embassies.”

Such a complex structure of power is a hallmark of a typical empire, especially during its expansion phase. Republican Rome, for example, had its core territory inhabited by voting citizens, colonies peopled with Romans and Latins, territories inhabited by nonvoting citizens, allied cities, and client states such as Massilia in southern Gaul. The degree of political control declined from the center to the periphery. With time, however, the periphery was more closely integrated with the center.

Some might object that the U.S. cannot be an empire because it is democratically governed. However, not all empires have emperors. There were democratically governed empires such as the Athenian and the British. The Roman Empire under the Republic was governed collectively by several hundred noble and wealthy senatorial families. The political arrangements by which a state is governed are irrelevant to the definition of empire.

Retired Lt. Gen. William E. Odom, who headed the National Security Agency in the 1980s, and Robert Dujarric, a Council on Foreign Relations Hitachi fellow, estimate in their book, America’s Inadvertent Empire, that the American empire “comprises 17 percent of the world’s population but controls about 70 percent of the gross world product. Because nearly all of the developed countries are included, the network’s share of science, technology, and corporate resources is closer to 90 percent of the world’s total.”
