After two turbulent decades (the 130s and 120s B.C.), a new generation of leaders came to power who managed to preserve fragile internal peace for almost 30 years. A populist politician Lucius Apuleius Saturninus tried to push a program of radical legislation down the throats of the optimates in 100 B.C., but the optimates murdered him and suppressed the populist party, preserving the equilibrium for another decade. However, below the surface, pressures were building up. The main issues that dominated the political arena were the demand for land by impoverished citizens, and the demand for citizenship by the Italian allies. The optimates stubbornly resisted both of these demands.

In 91 B.C. the allies revolted (this civil war is misleadingly known as the Social War, a better translation from Latin would be “the war with allies”), and the next two decades were those of almost continuous internal warfare. The Social War ended in 87, when Rome extended citizenship to all Italians, but was immediately succeeded by the civil war between the populist and optimate factions, led respectively by Marius and Sulla. During this conflict, first Marius and then Sulla used the proscriptions to exterminate their opponents in their hundreds and thousands. There was the rebellion of the Marian leader Sertorius in Spain. The slave rebellion led by Spartacus (73-71 B.C.) was the final straw that shocked the ruling class into some semblance of consensus.

Another fragile equilibrium was achieved in 70 B.C. under the consul-ships of Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) and Marcus Licinius Crassus. This peaceful interlude lasted for another 20 years, and was marred only by the Conspiracy of Catiline (63 B.C.), a rebellion that was rather easily suppressed by the consul Marcus Tullius Cicero, the famous orator.

The equilibrium was shattered when Caesar crossed the Rubicon in 49 B.C. The next two decades were another period of continuous civil war. First, it was Julius Caesar against Pompey the Great, then Caesar against Pompey’s partisans after the Great One’s death in Egypt in 48 B.C. After the assassination of Caesar, the struggle was between Caesar’s assassins, Brutus and Cassius, and Caesar’s successors, Mark Anthony, Lepidus, and Octavian (44-42). The period of 41 to 31 saw confused struggle between Octavian, Mark Anthony, and Sextus Pompey (the son of the Great One) in various combinations. Eventually, Sextus Pompey was defeated in Sicily, but escaped to Greece, where he was executed; Mark Anthony was defeated in the battle of Actium, and committed suicide in Egypt in 30 B.C. This, finally, left Octavian, or Augustus as he was now styled, the last one standing. In 27 B.C. he established the new political regime, which we call the Principate (from the title he used, the princeps, because the emperor was in theory merely the first among equals).
