In France, rival factions formed around two powerful magnates, the constable of Montmorency and the duke de Guise, during the 1550s. When the French king Henry II died in 1559, the Guise faction succeeded in virtually monopolizing the patronage of the young king, Francis II. The success of the duke de Guise and his Catholic party provoked an anti-Guise plot by several thousand Huguenot nobles in 1560, which was brutally suppressed. Intra-elite conflict then rapidly escalated into the French Wars of Religion. Duke de Guise was assassinated by a Huguenot nobleman in 1563, triggering a spiral of revenge and counter-revenge killings that decimated the top ranks of the French nobility during the next three decades.

The rise and fall of the dukes of Buckingham and de Guise graphically illustrates the dangers of extreme inequality for the social order. Rampant inequality feeds into the perception of the extant social order as unjust and illegitimate, and creates excellent breeding conditions for the rise of revolutionary ideologies. In the early modern period, these ideologies took the religious form. Later, the dominant revolutionary ideologies were nationalistic and Marxist. Today, we are seeing the rise of religious-based revolutionary ideologies again, such as the Wahhabism. There are huge differences between the English Puritans, the French Jacobins, the Russian Bolsheviks, and the Islamic Al Qaida, but there is at least one common thread running through all these ideologies and movements associated with them—a burning desire for social justice.

THE WARS OF RELIGION WERE OVER before d‘Artagriari was born. When he began his career in the 1630s, the French nobility still retained the collective memory of the bloodbath of the Wars of Religion. So the young bloods killed each other with gusto, but the older statesmen did not allow this dueling and factional infighting to grow into a full-scale civil war. It was only when all those who had direct memory of the Wars of Religion died out or retired that the d’Artagnan generation became free to repeat the mistakes that led to the previous civil war.

When d’Artagnan arrived in Paris to seek service with the king, the wealthiest man in France was Armand du Plessis, cardinal-duke of Richelieu. The annual income of Richelieu was several million livres, and over his 18 years of service as prime minister he accumulated a staggering fortune of 22 million livres. For comparison, the majority of French nobility at this time “enjoyed” incomes of 1,000 livres per year or less. And these were among the richest 2 percent of the population of France! Urban workers, except for the skilled ones, earned less than 100 livres per year.
