Tolstoy’s concept of history as a result of the sum of myriads of human wills is, therefore, valid but overly simplistic (which is not surprising because science in the nineteenth century had not yet discovered sensitive dependence and chaos). Actions by many individuals are not simply added together, in the same manner that we calculate the statistics of suicide rate by adding together all suicides in a year. Things are more complex. Some micro actions, by most people most of the time, have no effect whatsoever on the behavior of the system as a whole—they are completely dampened out at the macro level. But sometimes an individual acts in a place and at a time where the macrosystem is extremely sensitive to small perturbations. Then a little act of a little individual can trigger an avalanche of consequences, and result in a complete change of the course of events. The childhood rhyme “For want of a nail” illustrates this idea perfectly.

This is an optimistic conclusion, because it suggests that not all individual action is doomed to be futile at the macro level of social systems. There is no excuse in not trying to do good, because even if most of such actions would probably dissipate without any lasting effect, once in a while a small action will have a large effect. We can really amplify the effects of our efforts by organizing or joining a group.

But the optimism should be tempered by humility. Small acts can cause large effects, but people performing these acts usually have no idea whether there will be an effect at all, and if there is, what it will be. It is in the nature of dynamical systems to behave in seemingly capricious ways, so that an action aimed at achieving one objective might end up doing precisely the opposite. The French nobles, clergy, and third-estate notables, who in 1789 stopped obeying the king and took the government in their own hands, certainly had no intention of starting a bloody revolution in which most of them would lose their heads to the guillotine. Yet this is precisely what happened.

TOLSTOY’S DISCUSSIONS OF THE SCIENCE of history were not limited to his thoughts on the role played by individuals versus large impersonal social forces. He also made it very clear that the theory of history should be expressed in mathematical terms. In one remarkable passage, dealing with the guerilla war by the Russians against Napoleon’s troops, he actually used mathematical equations.
