In the scenario of group selection described above, it is not even necessary to assume that all members of defeated bands were physically destroyed. More likely, defeated bands simply disintegrated or disbanded, with their members seeking admittance to other surviving bands. Furthermore, cultural group selection operates on a much faster time scale than genetic group selection. If a moralistic individual turned out to be a very successful hunter or a particularly charismatic person, he or she would be emulated by the young members of the group. The moralistic behavior, then, will rapidly spread within the group. However, other groups are also observing what the successful group is doing, and can imitate its various practices. Moralism in the form, say, of a religious commandment from Muhammad can spread rapidly to other groups. Of course, cultural imitation can spread not only group-beneficial practices, but also harmful practices. A band initially dominated by moralists may happen to include a highly charismatic knave, who will influence people around him. But as knavery spreads through the band by the process of cultural imitation, the group will lose its internal cohesion and succumb to the moralistic bands in the neighborhood. In other words, it is competition between groups that ensures that prosocial behaviors spread and flourish. Cultural transmission facilitates and speeds up the evolution.

Recall the situation on the Roman frontier in northwestern Europe. When they first came in contact, the Romans were clearly superior in their military ability to the various Germanic tribes. The Romans did many things differently; so what should the tribesmen have imitated? The Romans did not wear pants, but any German foolish enough to imitate that aspect of the Roman cultural package would not survive the next winter, never mind the next night out partying with the guys. On the other hand, the Romans had discipline and fought in close ranks. When the Germans imitated this particular cultural practice, they found that it worked for them, too. The point is that we do not even have to assume that imitators know what they are doing. By imitating enough cultural elements of a successful group, they will eventually hit on the ones that bring success. In the process, they will probably also adopt many irrelevant, but harmless practices. (The harmful ones will be eventually weeded out by group selection.) And humans are quite smart, so they will often figure out precisely just what behavior they need to imitate.
