Rome began as a frontier town at the interface between the Etruscan and Latin cultures. It was situated on the first ford and easiest landing place on the Tiber. The location on the Tiber was a great bonus for later development of Rome, because this river provides the best route for moving goods inland in Tyrrhenian Italy. But the frontier location was even more important in molding the future empire. From the evidence of the Roman chronicles, supported by archaeological data, it seems the Roman nation arose as a result of a classic process of frontier ethnogenesis. According to the Roman tradition, the population of early Rome was divided into three tribes—Ramnes, Tities, and Luceres. Their names come from Romulus, a Latin; Titus Tatius, a Sabine; and Lucumo, an Etruscan. Clearly a fusion of Latin, Sabine, and Etruscan ethnic elements led up to the rise of the Roman nation. The tale of the Rape of the Sabines, of Romans capturing wives from the Sabines and eventual unification of the two groups, also attests to the multi-ethnic origin of the Romans. The Romans of later times were well aware of their mixed ethnic origins, and actually prided themselves on their ability to accept talented foreigners into their ranks. In 504 B.C., the Sabine leader Appius Claudius migrated to Rome with a private retinue of 5,000 armed clients. He was admitted to the senate as a patrician, and his followers were given land to settle on. The patrician clan of Claudii played a prominent role in later Roman politics, and supplied a number of emperors to the Roman Empire. Another indication of the openness to outsiders is the mottled ethnic origin of the Roman rulers during the Archaic period, who included the Sabine Titus Tatius and Numa Pompilius, and the Etruscan Tarquins. The ability to incorporate groups and individuals of foreign origin into the social fabric of their society served the Romans well when they expanded beyond the boundaries of Latium.
