Lest the import of this quote be misinterpreted, it is worth reiterating that pure coercion is not the explanation of why the British enlisted in huge numbers in the World War I. Some undoubtedly were forced to enlist by the tactics described in the previous paragraph, but others enlisted out of sheer patriotism; yet others were motivated by a mixture of patriotism and fear of harassment. Furthermore, the harassment of shirkers by the British women is emphatically not a self-interested behavior. By inducing another man to enlist, they did not better the survival chances of their husbands or sons in any appreciable way. These women put pressure on men to enlist not out of self-interest, but because of the expectations of their society at large, or more precisely, social norms.

Cooperative inclinations played a large role in explaining mass volunteering, but it would be simplistic and wrong to say that the whole nation spontaneously and uniformly rose up to smite the enemy. Just as it would be simplistic and wrong to say that all the British enlistees were coerced to join. The explanation requires a more nuanced and dynamic understanding.

EACH SOCIETY CONTAINS A SUBSTANTIAL proportion of people who, in addition to looking out for their material interest, are also motivated, at least in part, by social norms. So how did it come about that adherence to such norms became widespread in humans? Doesn’t the theory of natural selection predict that such altruistic behaviors could never evolve? For an explanation, we need to look to some recent developments in evolutionary biology and anthropology.

Actually, Charles Darwin himself was concerned with the apparent problem altruistic behavior presented to his theory of evolution. “Selfish and contentious people will not cohere, and without coherence, nothing can be effected. A tribe possessing ... a greater number of courageous, sympathetic, and faithful members, who were always ready to warn each other of danger, to aid and defend each other ... would spread and be victorious over other tribes.” The mechanism, proposed by Darwin, is now known as “group selection”—cooperation within groups evolves as a result of competition between groups. During the twentieth century, group selection went on a dizzying roller coaster, first enjoying wide acceptance, then being completely repudiated, and now on its way back to prominence, although in a different, more mature form. The problem was that during the first stage of uncritical acceptance, a lot of very bad theory was propounded by the adherents of the concept such as the famous Austrian ethologist Konrad Lorenz in his book On Aggression.
