As DISCUSSED IN CHAPTER 6, the first secular cycle of Rome began in the seventh century B.C. and ended in the middle of the fourth century B.C. The centralizing, integrative tendency dominated the first half of this period (up to 500 B.C.), and the disintegrative, centrifugal tendency predominated during the second half. The important landmarks in Roman history were the sack of Rome in 390 B.C. by the barbarian Gauls, which signaled the arrival of a new metaethnic frontier, and the Licino-Sextian Laws of 367 B.C., which transformed the political structure of the Roman state. By the second half of the fourth century, patricians and noble plebeians merged into a new social and political elite, the senatorial class. Their new cohesion was sorely needed for the struggle against the Gauls. It also bred success in the external wars of conquest, which brought in booty and land. Increased resources reduced competition within the society, strengthening its asabiya, which bred military success, in a kind of a virtuous cycle. The reorganized Roman state easily turned back a new Gallic invasion in 349 B.C. and began a long period of conquest of first central Italy, then all of the peninsula, and eventually the whole Mediterranean.

The integrative phase of the second secular cycle was unusually long. It lasted for two centuries and ended around 140 B.C. During the two centuries that followed the Licino-Sextian compromise, Rome maintained unity at home, while fighting a series of ferocious wars abroad. Some of these external conflicts, especially the war with Hannibal, imposed horrific casualties on the Roman citizenry, thus setting back population increase. This was one of the reasons for an unusually long integrative phase. The second reason was the very success of Rome’s expansionist program. Conquests brought in booty, tribute, and lands that underwrote the expansion of the elites without making the society top-heavy (or, rather, it postponed the inevitable day of reckoning). Common citizens also participated in the division of the spoils. During the period 334 to 263 B.C. alone, an estimated 70,000 citizens left Rome for the colonies established within the conquered territories. As a general rule, territorial expansion prolongs integrative phases. The integrative phase during the third Roman cycle was also unusually long, lasting from 27 B.C. to A.D. 180.
