Paradoxically, although France possessed plenty of wonderful agricultural land, more than enough to feed its greatly diminished population, there was a serious deficit of land that could be cultivated in peace. Peasants abandoned villages for the relative safety of fortified towns. Around such Alsatian towns as Colmar, there were whole “belts” of dead villages. The abandoned land was allowed to turn fallow, or was lightly grazed by cattle. Incessant warfare also destroyed infrastructure. For example, in the area of Langle (modern Pas-de-Calais) the drainage system was abandoned, and the land was first flooded and then deserted. The French historian Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie estimates that a minimum of 10 million acres of land was abandoned between 1350 and 1440.

As a result, famine became endemic in France during the first half of the fifteenth century. There were crises in food supplies around Paris and Rouen in 1421, 1432, 1433, and particularly 1437-39. The fundamental problem was not overpopulation, as in 1315-22, but lack of security. This can be seen most clearly by looking at how real wages fluctuated during the fifteenth century. The fourteenth-century population decline translated into excellent real wages for working people. In the first decade of the fifteenth century (before the second crisis), a building worker in Paris could buy 25 kilograms of grain with his daily wage. During the war decades of the 1420s and 1430s, by contrast, the laborer’s wage collapsed to 10 kilograms of grain. As soon as the area around Paris was pacified, however, the wages jumped back up. From 1440 to the end of the century, the daily wage was again equivalent to 25 kilograms of grain. The second half of the fifteenth century was deservedly called the golden age of the common people.

THE DISINTEGRATIVE PHASE OF THE secular cycle could not end until the surplus nobility were somehow removed from the scene. This problem was solved during the first half of the fifteenth century—not by a conscious design, but as a result of operation of impersonal social forces. The numbers of nobility diminished because of increased mortality and downward mobility, and decreased upward mobility.
