In northern Italy, by contrast, several medium-sized states developed across the centuries. Venice created a Mediterranean trading empire, and conquered a substantial chunk of continental Italy. During the fourteenth century, the duchy of Milan managed to conquer most of the Po Valley. On the other hand, no true metaethnic frontier developed in trans-Apennine region after the collapse of the Roman Empire. The various Germanic invaders settled among the natives and rapidly assimilated to Christianity (if they were not yet Christian) and the Romance language. Thus, the asabiya of northern Italians was only sufficient for building small or medium-sized states. When great imperial powers—France, Spain, Austria—intruded into Italy, even the strongest Italian states, such as Milan, were reduced to choosing (at best) which of the external empires to submit to. In the nineteenth century Italy was unified, characteristically, by northerners—the Piedmontese of what is misleadingly called “the kingdom of Sardinia,” a state that actually originated on the other side of the Alps in what is now French Savoy. Nevertheless, it was remarkable that Italy managed to become unified at all—in fact, the Italian unification is a rare exception to the rule that large states can arise only on metaethnic frontiers. The state built by the Piedmontese was neither particularly large, nor particularly good at the game of empire, but it still constitutes a counterexample, or an anomaly from the point of view of the metaethnic frontier theory. This exception to the rule underlines the point made earlier in the book, that historical dynamics is much more complex than, say, planetary motions around the sun. The associations between metaethnic frontiers and aggressive empires is a powerful historical generalization, but it is not without some exceptions, even if the exception cases are borderline, like nineteenth century Italy.

After the unification, Italy attempted to join the club of the great powers, but its imperial career in modern times was short and inglorious. The performance of the Italian army during the two world wars was, to state it most generously, lackluster. Italy also holds the dubious distinction of being the only European state that was defeated by an African country (Ethiopia) in the nineteenth-century scramble for colonies.

I do not want, however, to give an impression that military success is the only measure of social solidarity. Furthermore, the wars in which the post-unification Italy was involved were conducted overseas. A true measure of solidarity is the ability of a country to defend itself when invaded, and even defense of the patria is not the only purpose to which social solidarity could be put. Economic growth also requires a certain degree of social capital, and northern Italians have done very well by this measure. This is a theme to which I will return in Part III.

Part III

CLIODYNAMICS

A New Kind of History

Chapter 12
