THE TWO FORCES THAT REDUCED economic inequality in England after the Black Death were low population and high social instability. Low population resulted in good wages and a high employment rates, meaning landless peasants and urban workers could generate comfortable incomes to feed their families. The same conditions made it difficult for the rich to generate high incomes from their property. Chaotic conditions reduced inequality by hitting particularly strongly both the very poor and the very rich; the middling sorts suffered relatively less. The impoverished died in droves during the recurrent epidemics and periodic food shortages brought on by civil war. They were also exterminated without pity when caught in the factional fighting. The wealthy and powerful magnates were also vulnerable because they were the natural foci around which political power crystallized. Having already much power, they wanted more and aimed for the throne, or set themselves up as kingmakers. If they personally were not ambitious, their retinues pushed them to reach for greater power so that they could participate in the division of spoils. Those of the magnates who resisted such pressures fell afoul of the rulers, who could never trust them, and executed them on trumped-up charges. Being at the top of the power pyramid in fifteenth-century England was lethal. If in 1300 there were 200 great baronial families, who were summoned to the House of Lords, in 1500 there were only 60, and half of them were of recent origin. The king himself, Henry VII, was a grandson of the Welsh adventurer Owen Tudor. The house of Plantagenet, with all of its numerous branches, was exterminated.

Toward the end of Henry VII’s reign (he died in 1509), England was at peace, internally and externally. This was the best time for the little people, their true golden age. Wages were good, food prices low, epidemics declined, and the strong state suppressed banditry and put a lid on noble violence. The four apocalyptic horsemen were in retreat—but not beaten once and for all. Their time would come again, because peace and prosperity in pre-industrial times contained the seeds of future war and misery.

Just as three centuries before, the population began increasing, first slowly, but then at an accelerating rate. During the next 150 years, the numbers of people in England doubled and approached the level of 1300, with the same consequences. The poverty of the lower classes began increasing again. The purchasing power of a worker’s daily wage was halved toward the end of the sixteenth century.
