The theoretical framework for understanding the rise and fall of imperial nations came from the same tradition. Take asabiya, the capacity for collective action. It is impossible to say that “Napoleon had great asabiya.” That would be as ridiculous as saying that “the temperature of this oxygen molecule is 10 degrees centigrade.” Asabiya is a property of a group, not an individual. Collective solidarity, of course, is not the only factor that influences the fates of empires, but other factors (population numbers, economic inequality, sociopolitical instability, and so on) have the same nature of being characteristics of groups or societies, rather than specific actions by kings, generals, and ministers. The explanations that I proposed in the course of this book are consistent with the logic argued by Tolstoy.

This is not necessarily a good thing, because under certain conditions actions of some individuals do matter. Constantine the Great established the Byzantine capital at a particularly auspicious place—on a crossing of trading routes, but also in a highly defensible location. Some historians argued that the situation of Constantinople was a big factor in the subsequent survival of the Byzantine Empire. I do not think it was the definitive factor, but, on the other hand, I would not want to deny that it played an important positive role in increasing the empire’s longevity.

A better example is the influence of Napoleon on obtaining victory on the battlefield. When describing Napoleon’s actions at the field of Borodino (the major battle of the 1812 invasion of Russia by Napoleon, which was marginally won by the French), Tolstoy stresses how ineffectual Napoleon’s orders were in directing his troops. Consistently with his conception of history, Tolstoy argues that Napoleon was simply deluding himself that he directed anything. In actuality, each army fought on its own, because officers and soldiers themselves knew what had to be done, and orders arriving from Napoleon were outdated or simply wrong. The Russian commander Kutuzov does not meddle in this natural process, and gains Tolstoy’s approval for that.
