ALTHOUGH THE ATHENIANS WERE VERY different in their social organization from the Spartans, a similar logic affected their treatment of their own subject people, and ensured that their short-lived empire (478-404 B.C.) would not be terribly cohesive or extensive. The Athenian Empire started as a cooperative venture—the Delian League, put together by lonians to better resist the Persian Empire. Note that it was the overwhelming external threat of Persian invasion in the early fifth century B.C. that briefly united the Greeks. One might imagine that if the Persian frontier were to stabilize for an extended period of time right by Athens, instead of Macedonia as was the case, it would be Athens that would build a mighty empire. Instead, however, the Persians withdrew from the Greek heartland after they lost the naval battle of Salamis.

When the external threat was gone, the Athenians proceeded to use the Delian League for their own selfish purposes rather than for the common good. They gradually converted the contributions by the league members from ships and men to money, which they used to build Athenian ships and to man them with Athenians. In other words, the Athenians set themselves up as a warrior upper class, supported by the economic contributions from the lower classes—the non-Athenian members of the Delian League. The parallel with the Spartans is striking, although the degree of subjugation imposed on the Athenian “allies” was not as severe as that imposed by the Spartans on the helots. The Ionians, nevertheless, resented the state of subjugation they found themselves in and looked for ways to throw off the oppressive Athenian yoke. When Athens lost the Peloponnesian War to the Spartans, her allies all escaped, and the Athenian Empire was over.

In contrast to Sparta and Athens, Rome was not abandoned by all her allies when she found herself in desperate straits during the Hannibalic war. Hannibal was able to detach various Italian communities from Rome only by threatening them with overwhelming force. Only the Bruttians, a hill tribe of southern Italy, went over to Hannibal wholeheartedly (and were later brutally punished by Rome for this). Many Italian cities fought loyally for Rome, and suffered greatly from Hannibal as a result. Some cities were internally divided by pro-Punic and pro-Roman factions. Aristocratic factions tended to stand by Rome, because of the inclusive way they were treated by Romans. Their loyalty was later rewarded when they and their descendants participated in the spoils of the spectacular Roman conquests of the second and first centuries B.C.
