After the conquest of the Gaul, the Roman frontier was established on the Rhine, leaving North France deep behind the lines. During the crisis of the third century, however, the Rhine frontier collapsed, and North France was subjected to severe raiding pressure from the Germanic tribes. Moreover, at the same time the Franks began pushing south and settling the Low Countries. As a result, North France found itself on a metaethnic frontier. This was a major fault line—between urbanized Romance-speaking Christians and tribal Germanic Odin worshippers—discussed in Chapter 3.

During the fourth century, the Roman Empire regained its internal stability. It was a time of prosperity and population growth, and archaeological data indicates that the population of southern Gaul completely recovered from the troubles of the third century. But in the north, population recovery was feeble, indicating continuing conditions of insecurity associated with an intense frontier. The usual frontier pressures must have been at work, because by the end of the fifth century a reasonably cohesive society emerged in North France. When the western Roman Empire finally collapsed in A.D. 476, its territory was divided among the kingdoms of Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Franks, Burgundians, and Alamanni. The only exception was the area of North France, which was held by the native elites led by the Roman patrician Syagrius.

The kingdom of Syagrius, however, was not a match against the surging power of the Franks. In 486, Clovis defeated Syagrius and incorporated his territory into the Frankish Empire. The Romano-Gallic nobility, however, was not displaced by the Frankish war chieftains. The Merovingian kings realized the value of trained and literate administrators for their budding empire, and the Romano-Gallic patricians were incorporated into the Frankish ruling elite. Several generations later, intermarriage and mutual assimilation made it difficult to tell the Frank from the Roman.
