Eventually, however, the social forces driving the secular cycle caught up with the Roman Republic. The important threshold was crossed in 203-175 B.C., when the Romans successfully subjugated Cisalpine Gaul, thus pushing the metaethnic frontier away from the core of the Roman state. In the aftermath of the war with Hannibal (218-201 B.C.), Roman census figures indicate that there were around 200,000 citizens (free adult males). During the next century, the number of citizens more than doubled. The population of the city of Rome increased even faster, from 150,000 to 450,000. (This estimate includes women, children, slaves, and resident foreigners.)

Massive population growth, coupled with the Roman custom of equal division of property among the heirs, resulted in rapidly increasing economic inequality. Several generations of property division among multiple heirs resulted in each heir’s share being grossly insufficient for feeding the family. The history was repeating itself, again. Some impoverished landholders were forced to sell their land to the aristocrats flush with the spoils of Rome’s conquests and eager to invest their fortune in land. Others tried to go on, ran up unsustainable debt levels, and also lost their land (or even freedom). The end result of this process was the gradual disappearance of the class of small landowners, which had been the backbone of the Roman state and army. Some citizens, unable to repay their debts, were turned into slaves. Others sold themselves into slavery because they were unable to feed themselves. The majority became landless proletarians and either worked the land of aristocratic landowners or drifted to Rome and other large cities in search of work. Finally, a few—those with few children, the thrifty and hardworking, or simply the lucky ones—grew in wealth and aspired to better their social standing.

The diminution of the class of small landowners was easily perceptible to the contemporary observers because these people were the ones who manned the Roman legions. Various authors decried what they perceived as “depopulation.” In reality, the overall population was expanding rapidly. What was declining was the numbers of the “middle classes,” the citizens with enough property to qualify them for the army service. To expand the pool of recruits, the authorities gradually reduced the minimum amount of property that qualified a citizen for army service, and finally abolished it altogether in 107 B.C. Despite these measures, the proportion of citizens in the Roman army kept declining, and the missing numbers had to be made up by using noncitizen Italian allies. By the end of the second century, there were two allies for each Roman serving in the army
