By the early 1340s, elite overproduction undermined the prosperity and unity of the France’s ruling class. Large numbers of nobles had hardly any more land than a well-to-do peasant; they were what the French historian Marc Bloch called the “seigneurs sans terre”—“lords lackland.” The wages paid to a man at arms varied between 7 sou 6 denier for a squire and 15 sou for a knight banneret. A typical campaign of one to two months could yield 25 to 50 livres, equivalent to an annual income of the lesser nobleman. And there was the prospect of loot and ransoms. When the crown issued summons for the fighting men of France, in preparation for the campaigns against the English, literally tens of thousands of knights responded. “Everything happened”, wrote the medieval military historian Philippe Contamine, “as if the king and his lieutenants ... were surprised, even nonplussed, by the number of men at arms who responded to their order. Perhaps hesitations Philip VI displayed in the course of the military operations may be partially explained by the perplexity, if not confusion, of his entourage, in the presence of the incessant flow of disorganized crowds flocking to join his person.” Whereas before the campaign the royal officers expected to get 10,000 cavalry troops, they would get two or even three times the number. Moreover, the nobles brought with them the enmities and feuds that multiplied over the previous decades, and now divided them. The French army was not a cohesive force, as its behavior on the field of Crécy amply demonstrated. Despite the king’s order not to attack, because the time was late and the forces were not properly arrayed, the vanguard charged the English in their well-defended positions. Later, one part of the French army fought another, when the knights decided to slaughter the Genoese crossbowmen. “Slay these rascals who get in our way,” somebody shouted as the knights cut their way through. Wave after wave of attack was launched from the disorganized French ranks, and the English defeated each one. The day after the battle, several French levies who did not even know that the battle was already lost, marched toward Crécy and were cut down by the English knights. In short, it is hard to avoid the impression that the French army defeated itself, with a very little help from the English.
