These texts, coming from both the humblest and the most exalted strata of the Roman society, can give us insight into the Roman psyche, but we have to understand the context. The purpose of Cicero’s speeches was not to inform us about the Romans; he used them to denounce his political opponents. Livy’s history reflects the biases of him and the Romans of his times, first century B.C. During the century between the tribuneship of the reformer Tiberius Gracchus (133 B.C.) and the establishment of the Principate by Augustus (27 B.C.), Rome experienced a period of secular decentralization. It would be difficult for Livy, living as he did during the turbulent and fratricidal civil wars, to avoid painting early Roman history in rosy colors, depicting the Romans of bygone times as more patriotic, virtuous, and moderate in tastes and personal consumption than his contemporaries. Nevertheless, biased as they are, the Roman texts are of great value to anyone who wants to understand world history because they articulate a detailed world view; they describe the Roman ideal of a good citizen. In conjunction with other kinds of data, they can also tell us how societies change with time. Livy often contrasts the rampant luxury and conspicuous consumption of his own times, the first century B.C., with the simpler, less-materialistic mores of the ancestors—and the archaeological record confirms that Roman aristocrats of the fourth and third centuries led very Spartan lives. When we combine the wealth of textual and archaeological data with modern theory, new understandings of the nature of world history can emerge.

The early Romans developed a set of values, called mos maiorum (ancestral custom), which governed their private and public lives. Probably the most important value was virtus (virtue), which derived from the word vir (man) and embodied all the qualities of a true man as a member of society. Virtus included the ability to distinguish between good and evil and to act in ways that promoted good, and especially the common good. It also meant the devotion to one’s family and community, and heroism in war. Unlike Greeks, Romans did not stress individual prowess, as exhibited by Homeric heroes or Olympic champions. The ideal of hero was one whose courage, wisdom, and self-sacrifice saved his country in time of peril. “Who with the prospect of death, envy, and punishment staring him in the face, does not hesitate to defend the Republic, he truly can be rekoned a vir,” says Cicero. Young men were taught that it was “sweet and glorious to die for one’s country.”
