How did the Spartans develop this unusual but highly effective social organization? In the eight century B.C., when Sparta unified Laconia in the southern Peloponnesus, it was a fairly typical Greek city-state. The turning point occurred toward the end of the eighth century when Sparta conquered the neighboring area of Messenia. The Spartans divided the land into allotments and turned the Messenians into serfs (helots) who were required to work the land. The rent from each allotment supported an individual Spartan household. In other words, the Spartans turned themselves into a ruling class with leisure (if it can be called that) to devote to military training. The helots were not particularly happy with this state of affairs, and during the succeeding centuries periodically revolted in an attempt to free themselves from the Spartan subjugation. The perpetual threat of helot rebellion (who were ready to rise any time Sparta would encounter military difficulties) was a constant reminder to the Spartan masters not to slacken off on their training and relax their discipline. When the Spartans were finally defeated in battle in 371, the Messenians immediately seceded, and that was the end of Sparta as an important player in Greek politics.

Note here the great difference between the arrangements that Sparta made in Messenia and Rome’s treatment of her defeated enemies. Through the fourth, third, and second centuries, Rome continued her policy of admitting former adversaries to the commonwealth. At the end of the last Latin war in 338, Rome absorbed all Latin communities. By the end of the fourth century, Latium and Campania were merged together into a Roman-Campanian state, which involved agreement between the Roman and Capuan aristocracies to create a shared army. The great Capuan families were welcomed into the Roman senate. By 264, all peninsular Italy was under Rome’s control. The details of incorporation varied. Some communities were closely integrated with Rome. Their aristocrats were full Roman citizens, and commoners had all rights of a Roman citizen except for voting. Other communities became allied states—they managed their internal affairs, contributed troops to the Roman army, but did not pay taxes. In the last century B.C., all Italian communities were given full citizenship.
