“coalescence of global terrorist networks” as Anne Rueter reports in Ann Arbor News, (March 28, 2004) Scott Atran argued, “It’s clear we have misunderstood the nature of global jihad. It’s misguided to think that terrorist attacks—98 suicide attacks occurred globally last year—are orchestrated by a tightly organized network run by al-Qaida. Rather, it seems we face a set of largely autonomous groups and cells pursuing their own regional aims. He describes terrorist cells that share motivation and methods with al-Qaida but act in isolation, swarming on their own initiative—homing in from scattered locations on various targets and then dispersing, only to form new swarms.”

“Estrada fell.” More recently, anti-Japanese demonstrations in China became so widespread, that the Chinese authorities became worried that they could keep them under control. See Yarley, J. 2005. A Hundred Cellphones Bloom and Chineses Take to the Streets. New York Times (April 25,2005).

“complex self-organizing behavior” see Strogatz, S. 2003. SYNC: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order. Hyperion, New York; and Barabasi, A. L. 2003. Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else and What It Means. Plume.

Acknowledgments

“I’d like to start the pleasant labor of thanking various people for enabling me to finish this book with my parents, who not only gave me life, but also set me on the path of intellectual curiosity and life-long infatuation with science from a very early age—longer than I can remember. Later in life I learned a tremendous amount about how to do research from my teachers and colleagues in the biological sciences, too many to enumerate here. Most recently, my colleagues in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology were very supportive of the new directions my curiosity took me, even though it landed me well beyond the boundaries of biology.

In this age of scientific specialization crossing scientific boundaries is fraught with difficulties and dangers. This is why I feel an enormous debt of gratitude to my colleagues in the social sciences who gave me positive feedback during the early stages of my investigation into historical dynamics—Jack Goldstone, Tom Hall, Rob Boyd, Randall Collins, Sergey Nefedov, Andrey Korotayev, Chris Chase-Dunn, and many others.

I am grateful to the University of Connecticut for providing a nurturing and supportive environment for unconstrained intellectual discovery. My department head, Greg Anderson, encouraged me to strike out beyond disciplinary bounds and provided much needed release from teaching. The dean of the Colleage of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Ross MacKinnon, supported my work in a most tangible way, by funding half salary of my research assistant. The excellent and well-stocked library at the University of Connecticut was indispensable. Deborah Tyser provided essential research assistance; without her energetic and expert help this book would take twice as long to research and write.
