On June 28, 1914, in Sarajevo, Bosnia, the Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip rushed to a car in which sat Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, and his wife, Countess Sophie. Princip shot two times, hitting Sophie in the stomach and Franz Ferdinand in the neck. Both died shortly thereafter of their wounds. After accomplishing his mission, Princip swallowed a capsule of cyanide, but the poison was defective and only made him vomit. He then tried to shoot himself with his gun, but it was wrestled from his hand. Princip was tried, sentenced to a life in prison (he was too young for the death penalty), and died four years later in prison from tuberculosis.

One month after the assassination of Franz Ferdinand, and using it as a pretext, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Russia, who was tied by a defensive treaty to Serbia, began mobilizing, which was treated as a hostile act by Germany. On August 1, Germany declared war on Russia, which dragged into the war Russian allies France and England. World War I had begun.

We know of the carnage and social trauma that ensued, but little is usually made of how overwhelmingly the European populace supported its various governments’ decisions to go to war. Patriotic crowds demonstrated for war in Vienna, Berlin, and London. More tellingly, all over Europe hundreds of thousands volunteered for the army. In the British Empire, for example, there was no need to introduce conscription until 1916. Three hundred thousand men enlisted during the first month of the war, and more than 450,000 in the next month. Even on the other side of the world, Australians rode for days to get to towns where they could enlist and begin the long voyage to Europe.

By the end of war, more than 8.5 million were dead from bullet, artillery shell, poison gas, or trench sickness. In France, every sixth soldier mobilized for war was killed. More than half were wounded. Only one soldier in three escaped the meat grinder unscathed in body (if not in soul).

The willingness of the British, the French, and the Germans to fight for their country is only one of the many striking examples of the human capacity to sacrifice self-interest for the sake of a very broad common good. Less dramatically, we pay taxes, take time to vote, and participate in unions and demonstrations. On a darker side, the willingness of Gavrilo Princip to murder Franz Ferdinand even at the expense of his life, or the eagerness with which Palestinian suicide bombers sacrifice themselves to inflict horror on the Israelis, falls into the same category. The “common good” does not refer to the whole humanity, but only to a part of it, the group for which the sacrifice is made, be it the Serbian, Palestinian, or English nations.
