Two FACTORS EXPLAIN THE RISE of the Roman Empire: the high degree of internal cohesiveness of the Roman people, or asabiya, which reached a peak c. 200 B.C.; and the remarkable openness of the Romans to the incorporation of other peoples, often recent enemies. Both factors are necessary for building a world empire. Without high asabiya, an incipient imperial nation cannot survive being surrounded by powerful enemies in the early days of its expansion. Without the ability to truly incorporate the conquered people, an imperial nation cannot grow. Theoretically, there is an alternative: genocide or ethnic cleansing of conquered territory followed by colonization. Many imperial nations employed this strategy to some degree, but in practice all successful ones expanded mainly by cultural assimilation, rather than by biological reproduction. Openness to incorporation is a critical factor in explaining the difference between the imperial careers of the Romans and, say, Macedonians, as opposed to the Spartans, or Athenians.

The internal organization of the Spartans shows that the great degree of internal solidarity characterizing Rome was not unique. Of all Greek nations, the Spartans appear to be most similar to the early Romans. The grave demeanor of the Spartans, their abhorrence of excesses and luxury would have met with approval in Rome. More importantly, the two ancient nations had similar ideas about service to the country, up to and including giving up life. One does not need to go further for an example than the sacrifice of the 300 Spartans in the Thermopylae Pass. Some would propose that the Spartans achieved an even higher degree of asabiya than Romans.

The Spartan upbringing was designed to turn each Spartan into an outstanding, but above all loyal, soldier. At the age of seven, Spartan boys were taken away from their family and were brought up by the state. Plutarch, a Greek historian of the first century A.D., wrote of the Spartan education system emphasizing its military toughness. “They learned reading and writing for basic needs, but all the rest of their education was to make them well-disciplined and steadfast in hardship and victorious in battle. For this reason, as boys grew older, the Spartans intensified their training, cutting their hair short and making them used to walking bare-foot and for the most part playing naked. When the boys reached the age of 12, they no longer had tunics to wear, but got one cloak a year. Their bodies were tough and unused to baths and lotions. They only enjoyed such luxury only a few special days a year. They slept, in packs, on beds which they got together on their own, made from the tops of the rushes to be found by the river Eurotas. These they broke off with their bare hands, not using knives.”
