IN CHAPTER 1 I ASKED, HOW did a nation, Russia, transform itself from victim to empire? The outlines of an answer begin to emerge. The whole Russian people from the Cossacks patrolling the steppes to the farmers on the frontier and then on to the boyars in Moscow instinctively knew that they must cooperate against the threat posed by the nomads. This was not a rational calculation, but the result of a slow, centuries-long cultural change resulting from the life on the line where civilizations clashed. After all, the same calculation could have been made back in 1237 in the face of the imminent Mongol threat. The Kiev-period Russians had already had direct experience with Mongol warfare in 1223, when an expeditionary corps under two of Chinggis Khan’s generals, Jebe and Subotai, annihilated the joint Russian-Cuman army in the battle of the Kalka. The destruction of the Volga Bulgars in 1236 made it abundantly clear that the Mongols planned a systematic conquest; however, the Russians did not unite. Paradoxically, every principality, when taken individually, behaved in a completely rational manner. Each prince waited for others to unite and defeat the Mongols. Because each prince controlled only a small army, his contribution was not crucial to the common success. His potential costs, on the other hand, could be enormous. (For example, he could be killed.) Unfortunately, the same logic governed the actions of all his peers, with the result that no collective effort attempted to defend against Batu’s army. Such an individually rational, but collectively foolish, response is well known to sociologists and economists; it has been dubbed the “tragedy of the commons.”

The long exposure to the frontier conditions resulted in a profound change in the Russian culture. The general social mechanism responsible for this change is discussed later; for now, I only want to establish the reality of the cultural shift. Unlike their predecessors, the Moscow-period Russians behaved in a collectively astute way, even though acting so caused individual hardship or worse. As mentioned previously, the sense of solidarity and willingness to sacrifice for the common good were not based on a rational calculation; they had much deeper foundations. The frontier logic of “us versus them” molded the view that divided the world into the opposing camps of good and evil. On one side sat the Christian community that represented all that was decent in the world. On the other side sat the devil horsemen who worshiped their foul gods and committed unspeakable atrocities on the Christians. This black-and-white view of the conflict is wonderfully captured in the long quotation from the Stroganov Chronicle excerpted in Chapter 1 and in the painting “Ermak Conquers Siberia” by the nineteenth-century Russian artist Vasily Surikov. (Note that I have related in some detail how the Russians perceived the situation; the Tatars naturally had their own distinct view.)
