Well before Putnam, and even before the Italian experiment in devolution of powers to regional governments, anthropologists knew that something was wrong with the society of the Italian south—the Mezzogiorno, as it is known in Italian. A particularly interesting study is that by the American anthropologist Edward Banfield, who spent a number of years in a southern Italian village during the 1950s and 1960s. In 1967, he published a book detailing his findings, The Moral Basis of the Backward Society. Banfield describes the extreme atomization of the southern Italian society, in which all cooperative efforts are limited to the smallest possible societal unit, the family. Relations even to such kin as cousins, and sometimes even grown-up siblings, are rife with distrust and lack of cooperation. Community-level cooperative efforts are virtually impossible. Banfield called this type of society “amoral familism,” and defined its basic philosophy as this: “Maximize the material, short-run advantage of the nuclear family; assume that all others will do likewise.” This is the philosophy of the knave, in the technical sense of the term that I introduced in Part I. No wonder, then, that the Mezzogiorno society cannot function as a society. Even calling it a society is misleading; it is really a conglomerate of atomized nuclear families.

Putnam’s and other recent studies support and extend the anthropological, locally focused observations of Banfield. Big differences exist between the Italian north and south in the degree of interpersonal trust and solidarity. Northern Italians are much more networked. The density of civic associations such as choral societies, hiking clubs, literary circles, and hunting clubs is much higher in the north than in Mezzogiorno. Interest in public issues and devotion to public causes follow the same pattern. In other words, the performance of regional governments is a part of a whole bundle of social variables, at the root of which lies the variation in social capital, in asabiya among the regions.

Institutional performance is, thus, not a cause, but an effect of the quantity of asabiya. Social capital sounds like something made of bricks and mortar, some kind of plant machinery, but insofar as it is analogous to asabiya it is something profoundly human.
