Generally speaking, the average offer amount among the 15 societies was correlated with the probability of rejecting a low offer. But there was one exception. The overwhelming proportion of offers rejected by the Au and the Gnau of New Guinea were those that were high (greater than half of the pot). Among these groups, accepting a large gift puts the receiver under a strong obligation and into a subordinate position with respect to the giver. As a result, such gifts will be frequently refused, and this cultural quirk was reflected in the way people played the ultimatum game. Another example of how culture can be reflected in the manner with which people behave in the experimental setting is the Orma. This herding people in Kenya practice wide-scale cooperation. When they decide to build a new school or a road, members of the community are asked to contribute, with the wealthier (those who have larger herds) contributing proportionally more. This system is called harambee. When the public goods game was explained to the Orma, they quickly dubbed it a harambee game. Interestingly, their contributions in the game were strongly correlated with their real-world wealth, as it would be in harambee.

THE BEHAVIORAL EXPERIMENTS USING THE public goods and the ultimatum games decisively prove that Machiavelli’s self-interest premise was wrong. It is simply not true that all people behave in entirely self-interested manner. Some people—the knaves—are like that. However, other kinds of people, whom I have called the saints and the moralists, behave in prosocial ways. Furthermore, different societies have different mixtures of self-interested and cooperative individuals. Cultural practices (for example, the harambee system) and social institutions have a strong effect on whether and how collective action can be sustained.

The experiments also point to the key role of the moralists. Kindly saints are completely ineffectual in preventing cooperation from unraveling. In the absence of effective sanctions against free-riders, opportunistic knaves waste any contributions by the saints to the common good. Self-righteous moralists are not necessarily nice people, and their motivation for the “moralistic punishment” is not necessarily prosocial in intent. They might not be trying to get everybody to cooperate. Instead, they get mad at people who violate social norms. They retaliate against the norm breakers and feel a kind of grim satisfaction from depriving them of their ill-gotten gains. It’s emotional, and it’s not pretty, but it ensures group cooperation.
