What about forcing people to cooperate? For example, we might establish firing squads that would go to towns and villages and shoot everybody who fails to volunteer. When faced with a choice of being shot here and now, or joining the army and taking one’s chances, the rational agent would of course “volunteer.” But who will constitute the enforcement squads? Certainly not rational agents. Participation in the enforcement squad is personally costly (you might get killed by rioting draft evaders), whereas the benefit (getting an army together and resisting the invaders) is again spread evenly among all. In other words, the same logic applies as with enlisting in the army in the first place. (In the technical jargon, this is known as the “second-order collective-action problem.”) Perhaps we should punish those who do not join punishment detail? This is the suggestion of the famous graffiti in Boston scribbled by an opponent of Jay’s Treaty in 1795: “Damn John Jay! Damn everyone who won’t damn John Jay!! Damn everyone that won’t put lights in his windows and sit up all night damning John Jay!!!” But no, forcing self-interested people to join enforcement squads also does not work—it leads to infinite regress, the third-order collective-action problem, then the forth-order one, and so on. It turns out that if everybody is a rational agent, it is impossible to bring about cooperation, even by force.

Rational self-interested agents cannot join together in a functioning society—this could be one of the fundamental theorems in sociology. In a world where all individuals behave strictly rationally, armies would run away at the first shot (or would not even get together in the first place). Nobody would vote or pay taxes. IRS agents would accept bribes not to prosecute tax evaders, and then pass some fraction of that to the members of the Senate overseeing committee, to buy them off. The courts would make verdicts in favor of whoever can pay more, or has more power to intimidate the judges and juries. The police would let criminals go in exchange for part of their loot. Actually, I am painting too rosy a picture—when all behave in a purely self-interested manner, there will be no IRS, courts, or police. There could only be a Hobbesian war of all against all.

AT THE SAME TIME THAT THE social scientists were perfecting the theory of rational choice, biologists were doing the same for the theory of evolution by natural selection, reaching very similar conclusions. The biological counterpart of utility is “fitness”—the expected number of viable offspring contributed by an organism to future generations. Just as rational agents maximize utility, evolution maximizes fitness: The genes that endow their carriers with greater ability to survive and reproduce increase in the population by virtue of the inevitable fact that they make more copies of themselves than their competitors.
