The best data set, analyzed by Dupuy, was 81 engagements between the Allied (Anglo-American) and German forces in 1943-44. For each battle, Dupuy calculated force strengths, taking into account the numbers of tanks, artillery pieces, air support, and so forth. He then estimated the factor modifiers, such as the posture (defensive versus offensive). Finally, he evaluated the outcome of engagement, using such factors as the casualties on both sides, the achievement (or not) of the objective, and the loss of territory (when the defeated army was forced to retreat). The measured outcome of the battle gives us an estimate of the ratio of combat powers of the two armies, because we expect that an army with a greater battle power will win, and the greater is its power in relation to the opponent, the more favorable will the outcome be to the winner.

Dupuy now has an equation with three known quantities (the ratios of combat powers, of force strengths, and of modifying factors) and one unknown (the ratio of combat efficiencies). It is a simple matter to solve it for the unknown quantity, and we have our estimate of the relative combat efficiency (relative to the enemy, because we can only estimate the ratio of the two quantities—this is Tolstoy’s x/y).

The results are striking. The Germans consistently outperformed the Allies in the ability to wage combat. If we assign 1 to the average combat efficiency of the British, the American efficiency was 1.1 and German 1.45. In other words, if the British wanted to get an even chance at winning a battle against the Germans, they had to bring 45 percent more troops (or arm them more heavily in the same proportion). Americans had to mass a third as many troops as Germans to have a 50:50 chance of victory. Dupuy also calculated average estimated efficiencies for all the U.S., British, and German divisions that participated in multiple engagements. There was a significant amount of variation between individual divisions. For example, the best German division, Herman-Hoering Panzer-Parachute, was almost twice as good as the worst, the 29th Panzer. Despite this variation, the overall difference between the American and German combat efficiencies was very clear. If we remove the worst German division and the best American division, there would be no overlap. Apart from these two outliers, each German division was better than any American one.

This result is very believable, because anybody who read on the history of World War II knows that the Germans fought very well in it. However, it is one thing to have a qualitative impression of something, and a very different thing to have a quantitative estimate of the same thing, based on cold, hard numbers. Science thrives on numbers.
