As is usual with such investigations, I started with a simple model. Imagine an idealized society, in which peace and the rule of law reign—there is no violence or theft. Property can only be inherited or sold and bought. Because we are interested in agrarian societies, land is the main type of property. Initially, each family has the same amount of it. You might wonder why I bothered with such a simple model. Surely it has nothing in common with any real society? The point of this model, however, was not to provide a description of any specific situation, but to lay bare the logic of how inequality develops. The connection to the messy reality comes later, after we have finished building the theoretical framework within which this reality can be conceptualized.

So we start with an absolutely egalitarian distribution of wealth. Will this equality persist into the next generation? For one thing, different families will have different numbers of children. Children from larger families will inherit smaller portions, whereas in a family with a single child, that child will get the whole inheritance. In one generation, the wealth distribution will cease to be egalitarian. In the next generation, things will become worse, because again there will be variation in the number of children, and some of the already small plots will be subdivided further. As a result, inequality will grow with time. Ironically, the very conditions of social peace and lawful transmission of property between generations create the conditions under which the society gradually separates into the poor and the rich.

In this first-cut model, I assumed that property is divided equally among all children. How do other methods of inheritance affect the results? If only one child inherits, for example, the oldest son (this rule of inheritance is called “primogeniture”), all the rest of his brothers and sisters are dispossessed. In one generation, a whole class of propertyless people is suddenly created. Primogeniture, therefore, creates inequality even faster than equal division. If the first son gets half, and the other half is divided equally among the rest of the heirs, inequality will grow at the rate that is intermediate between that for equal division and primogeniture. Thus, unequal division of property only makes things worse.

We also need to consider what happens when a man and a woman form a family, and join their inheritances together. In my simple model, I assumed that couples are formed without paying attention to the wealth of the partner (the “love conquers all” assumption). However, it is more likely that wealthier men will tend to choose as brides wealthier women (or their parents will arrange such unions). When I added such a “materialistic” tendency to the model, I saw, as expected, a much faster rate of inequality increase.
