In 218 B.C., Hannibal crossed the Alps with his African and Spanish troops and 20 elephants, and for the next 17 years he ravaged central and southern Italy. What is often not appreciated is that the troops that Hannibal brought with him were outnumbered by the Gallic troops he recruited in the Po Valley. In fact, even before entering Italy, he corresponded with the chieftains of Cisalpine Gaul and ascertained that they would join him in his war on Rome. As time went on and battles took their toll on Hannibal’s African and Spanish troops, the Gallic element became more and more prevalent. Thus, the Hannibalic war can be thought of as yet another episode in the struggle of Rome against the Gallic hordes. The Roman fear of the Gauls was so ingrained, that although Italy was prostrated at the end of the Hannibalic war in 201 and the resources of Rome almost exhausted, the Romans nevertheless immediately began their reconquest of Cisalpine Gaul as soon as they expelled Hannibal. They campaigned there every year before 190 until they resubjugated the Gauls.

Even in an age when atrocities were regularly committed by all sides, the Roman treatment of the Gauls was especially brutal. Unlike other Italian peoples who were frequently admitted as allies, or even citizens, in the Roman commonwealth after being defeated by the Romans (as discussed earlier in this chapter), this treatment was never extended to the Gauls. On the contrary, when the Romans definitively conquered the Po Valley, they “ethnically cleansed” Gauls from it. Such treatment of the inhabitants of a conquered territory was exceptional in Roman practice. Even in the harsh treatment meted out to the defeated Carthaginians (the other nation that Romans hated with passion), when their beautiful and wealthy city was razed and its ground salted, the Romans left the agricultural population in the Carthaginian territory alone.
