Europe experienced three imperial ages. The first was the Roman Empire. As discussed in the preceding chapter, Rome arose on the fault line between Mediterranean civilization and Celtic “barbarism.” The geographic core of the Roman Empire was the Mediterranean Sea, which the Romans affectionately called “Our Sea” (Mare Nostrum). During the Roman period, the Mediterranean knitted its coastal regions together by permitting rapid communications by ship and cheap transport of troops and bulk goods. For example, Rome was fed by the annual shipment of enormous quantities of grain from North Africa. When Rome imploded, however, its core region (Italy, Greece, and the coastal provinces of Spain and North Africa) became a kind of “asabiya black hole”—an area where social cooperation on a scale large enough to build an empire was impossible to achieve. At the same time, new imperial nations, with the gift for collective action, arose on the Roman frontiers—the Franks, the Arabs and the Berbers, the Byzantines and the Avars. The new powers built their empires and squabbled over the core areas of the former Roman Empire, where capacity for collective action was low and political power was fragmented. As Christianity spread within Europe, and Islam within the Near East and North Africa, the Mediterranean Sea, instead of being a connector, became a dividing moat between two hostile and armed camps.

During the second imperial age, the empire of the Franks and other Germanic peoples dominated the western half of Europe. Like all large pre-industrial states, this medieval German Empire went through secular cycles of alternating integrative-disintegrative phases: the kingdom of the Franks under the Merovingian dynasty (the sixth and seventh centuries), the Frankish Empire under the Carolingians (the eighth and ninth centuries), and the German Reich under the Ottonian and Salian emperors (the tenth and eleventh centuries). The core region of this empire was centered on the Rhineland (formerly the Roman frontier in northwest Europe). Beginning in the twelfth century, this core area gradually disintegrated into a hodgepodge of statelets ruled by dukes, counts, and imperial knights; bishops and archbishops; and town councils. This political dissolution marked the development of another asabiya black hole, which ran in a wide band right through the middle of Europe.
