Another big difference between the Russian and the American societies was in the main method with which they distinguished “us” from “them.” In general, deep cultural differences can be manifested by a variety of “markers,” including the differences of language or dialect, religion, external appearance (race, clothing, visual symbols, or emblems). However, often a dominant indicator distinguishes the two peoples on the opposite sides of the fault line. In the Russian case, this marker was religion, so the conflict was primarily between the Christian Orthodox and the Muslims. The heavily religion-laden language in which Russian chronicles describe the conflict is one indication of this. Thus, the integrative role of the frontier worked only on those groups who were Orthodox. The Muscovites experienced a strong feeling of kinship toward the Orthodox inhabitants of Poland-Lithuania (Ukrainians, Belorussians) but not toward the Catholics (the Poles). Actually, the Orthodox Ugric people were more “us” to the Muscovites than the Catholic Slavs. One interesting corollary of using the religion as the principal marker was that it was possible for people originating in other civilizations to join the Muscovite society—by converting. Examples abound of Tatars of all ranks converting to the Orthodox Christianity and becoming “us” as far as the Muscovites were concerned. Many Cossacks originated from the baptized Tatars, and 17 percent of the Muscovite gentry in the seventeenth century were ethnically Tatars or descendants of the Tatars.

The American society distinguished itself from the Indians by using the race marker; it was not important whether the Indian was Christian or pagan, he still remained an outsider. A fair number of intermarriages occurred between those of European origin and Indians, but individuals marrying across the fault line often found themselves ostracized. The feeling against interracial marriages was the strongest when a White woman married, or had sexual relations, with an Indian male. Such a woman was excluded from the community, and in most cases would not be able to find a mate if she became unattached. The integrative role of the frontier was limited to the people of European descent. At this point, one might be tempted to condemn the racist Americans and praise the more broad-minded Muscovites, but such value judgments do not help us understand why empires rise and fall. For the purposes of this investigation, we will not be sorting historical peoples into the good guys versus bad guys.
