A huge influx of wealth from the conquests and the exposure to the “decadent Orient” drove conspicuous consumption by the Roman upper crust to levels that would have appalled Cincinnatus or Camillus. The degree of luxury enjoyed by the wealthy and powerful Romans is even surprising to us, the moderns. Just listen to Cicero:Here you have the other coming down from his fine house on the Palatine [one of the seven hills of Rome, a fashionable neighborhood for the wealthy]: He has for his enjoyment a pleasant suburban country seat, besides a number of farms all of them excellent and near the city; a house crammed with Delian and Corinthian vessels (made of gold, silver, and bronze, famous for their workmanship], among them a self-cooker (a utensil for boiling, resembling a tea urn], which he recently bought at so high a price that passers-by, hearing the auctioneer crying out the bids, thought that an estate was being sold. What quantities besides of embossed silver, of coverlets, pictures, statues, marbles can you imagine hepossesses?As much of course as could be heaped in a single house, taken from many illustrious families during the times of disturbance and rapine. But what am I to say about his vast household of slaves and the variety of their technical skill? I say nothing about such common trades, such as those of cooks, bakers, litter-bearers : To charm his mind and ears, he has so many artists, that the whole neighborhood rings daily with the sound of vocal music, stringed instruments, and flutes, and with the noise of banquets by night. When a man leads such life, gentlemen, can you imagine his daily expenses, his lavish displays, his banquets? Quite respectable, I suppose in such a house, if that can be called a house rather than manufactory of wickedness and lodging-house of every sort of crime. And look at the man himself, gentlemen; you see how, with hair carefully arranged and reeking with perfume, he struts about all over the forum accompanied by a crowd of wearers of the toga; you see what contempt he has for everyone, how he considers no one a human being compared with himself, and believes that he alone is wealthy and powerful.

The target of Cicero’s attack is Chrysogonus, a powerful freedman and a favorite of the dictator Sulla. As we all know, Sulla instituted “proscriptions” that identified certain individuals as enemies of the state that could be killed with impunity. The property of the proscribed was sold at auction, and the proceeds replenished Sulla’s treasury. Chrysogonus supervised this process, and used it to enrich himself. For example, Cicero charges that the property of Sextus Roscius, valued at 6 million, was sold for a mere 2,000 sesterces to Chrysogonus and his cronies.
