FROM THE MONGOLS IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY, to the Muscovites in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and then on to the Americans in the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries, we have romped through time and space. It is surprising how many things these societies have in common. The first and most obvious one is that they all were empire builders. It would not be an exaggeration to say that they built the three most powerful empires in world history. Less obviously, each of these three societies, although in its own culturally unique way, had a high capacity for concerted collective action. In fact, such a capacity seems to be a necessary condition for successful empire building. The society-level capacity for concerted action was, in turn, based on the ability of individuals to cooperate. Finally, all three peoples originated from intense and prolonged fault-line frontiers. (I have not yet presented the frontier origins of the Mongols, so for now you will have to take my word for it.)

Although each society achieved high capacity for concerted action, it is important to stress that specific cultural mechanisms employed to accomplish this were completely unique to each society. Fault-line frontiers have a strong influence on some aspects of societies, while leaving others indeterminate. Let us, for example, compare the Americans and the Muscovites. The basis for cooperation among the Americans was the voluntary civil association. The political organization of the Americans, accordingly, was democratic, and after they became independent of the British, they immediately set up a republic to govern their affairs. The ideological source of social power was solidly rooted in the popular will (the famous “we the people”). Whereas the Americans were deeply suspicious of the central government, the Muscovites, in contrast, embraced it as the fundamental organizing principle of their society. The form of government was a monarchy, or autocracy. The source of social power was not the people, but God’s will. Therefore, in theory, the tsar was not responsible to the common people for his actions, or even to the boyars. He answered for his deeds before God alone (at least this was how power was legitimated in Muscovy; in practice, of course, no ruler can last long if he does not take into account the wishes of his subjects).

It is natural for us to think that the American way is “good” and the Muscovite way is “bad.” Indeed, life is much more pleasant under a secular democracy than under an autocracy with strong theocratic elements. However, our ideological biases should not blind us to the basic fact that both societies, in their own ways, were extremely effective at solving the problems that they faced.
