Khalid, traveling through waterless desert, had to take one of two routes, either going by the well of Al Casima, or by the well of Al Khafir. The Persian commander first blocked Khalid’s route at Al Casima. Khalid, therefore, changed the direction and went to Al Khafir instead. The experienced Persian commander learned about this maneuver and got to Al Khafir first. Khalid’s troops were in desperate straits—their horses were tired and, if they were not given water soon, they would perish. Throwing caution to the winds, Khalid left behind all of his baggage, dismounted his troops, and advanced against the enemy on foot. Fortunately for the Arabs, it rained, which allowed them to slake their thirst (and was taken as sign that Allah was with them). The resulting battle was extremely fierce, with the Arabs fighting as men who had nothing to lose. When Khalid killed their commander, the Persians ran, leaving all their baggage behind.

It is remarkable how many parallels there are between this battle and the battle of Sibir. A band of desperate warriors deep in the enemy territory prevails against overwhelming odds. But the similarities between Khalid’s Arabs and Ermak’s Cossacks run even deeper. Both groups were the product of life on a fault-line frontier and, as a result, enjoyed a preponderance of asabiya over their enemies. A crucial component of their asabiyas, the potent “glue” that made each group highly cohesive, was a powerful monotheistic religion.

THE SPECTACULAR ARABIC CONQUESTS OF the seventh century continue to cause wonder. Many explanations have been offered, but most of them do not make sense. The Arabs did not have a numeric or technological advantage over their adversaries; in fact, quite the reverse. The conquest of Byzantine Syria was accomplished with only about 24,000 men, whereas the Byzantine Empire had 10 times as many soldiers. The only technological advantage that the Arabs had was the camel, which gave them enhanced mobility in desert or semi-desert environments. Camels were used primarily as transportation; prior to the battle, the Arabs dismounted and then fought on foot. Early Islamic armies also suffered from the lack of horses. In fact, at the battle of Uhud (625), Muhammad had no cavalry of his own. Two years later, he had only 30 horsemen. The problem was that under arid conditions of the Arabian Peninsula, keeping and breeding horses was very expensive, and only wealthy people could afford it. The Arabs encountered similar problems in attempting to find enough armor. Only a fraction of warriors possessed chain mail. Early victories over the Byzantines and Sassanians were not accomplished by employing cavalry, either as mounted archers or by charging, as one might think. Instead, the Arabs fought on foot. The single advantage that the Arabs had was their fighting spirit and willingness to fight to the death.
