Beauplan records that each Tatar warrior had two spare horses; so, a force of 80,000 was accompanied by more than 200,000 horses. “Trees are no thicker in a forest than horses at such times on the plain, and, seen from afar, they resemble a cloud rising from the horizon, growing larger and larger as it rises, striking terror into the hearts of even the most daring, if they are not used to seeing such multitudes together.” On the Ukrainian frontier of Poland-Lithuania, which lacked the systematic defenses constructed by the Muscovites, the typical tactic of the Tatar army was first to rapidly penetrate deep into the settled territory. After reaching 60 or 80 leagues ( 1 league equals 3 miles) in the interior, the army turned around, extended the flanks 8 to 12 leagues to the right and to the left, and began a systematic sweep of the territory for booty. All those who resisted were killed; everybody else was captured and taken away (including the livestock, except for pigs).

After a successful operation, when the Tatars were far enough in the steppes from the frontier not to worry about pursuit, they stopped to rest and reorganize. “During the interval of this week-long stop, they bring together all their booty, consisting of slaves and livestock, and divide the entire quantity among themselves. The most inhuman of hearts would be touched to see the separation of a husband from his wife, of a mother from her daughter, there being no hope of their ever seeing each other again. They are to become wretched slaves of Mohammedan pagans, who abuse them atrociously. The brutality [of these Tatars] causes them to commit an infinite number of filthy acts, such as ravaging young girls, raping women in the presences of their fathers and husbands, and even circumcising children before their parents’ very eyes, so that they may be offered to Mohammed.”

When the Tatar host encountered the Polish forces, they avoided fighting, because “these brigands (and so the Tatars should be named) never raid [Ukraine] for the purpose of fighting, but rather to pillage and steal by surprise.” The great advantages enjoyed by the steppe horsemen were stealth, mobility, and surprise. It was extremely hard to defend against their depredations and, in fact, the Ukrainians and the Poles, unlike the Russians, were unable to make headway against the Crimeans. When the Tatar pressure intensified in the late sixteenth century, the Ukrainians even lost some ground. For example, one third of all villages in the province of Podolia (situated between the Dniester and Dnieper rivers) were devastated or abandoned between 1578 and 1583.
