“Four pennies worth of coarse bread was not enough to feed a common man for one day. The usual kinds of meat, suitable for eating, were too scarce; horse meat was precious; plump dogs were stolen. And, according to many reports, men and women in many places secretly ate their own children.... Thieves who had been imprisoned, but given no food, ferociously attacked new prisoners and devoured them half alive.” Cannibalism was widespread everywhere in northern Europe. In Livonia and Estonia, starving mothers ate their children. Another chronicler confirms the stories of cannibalism and also reports that famished men often died on graves while digging up bodies for food. The effects of dearth were particularly terrible in Brabant. Jan Boendale wrote that in Antwerp the moans of famished could almost move a stone to pity. In the streets lay their emaciated forms, groaning in heartrending fashion. Several chroniclers claimed that a third of the population perished, although modern historians tend to reduce their estimates. When normal harvests returned, it is estimated that France was missing a tenth of its population.

The terrible famines of the fourteenth century left a deep imprint on the European psyche. One of the most famous fairy tales begins like this. “Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor woodcutter with his wife and his two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had little to bite and to break, and once when great dearth fell on the land, he could no longer procure even daily bread. Now when he thought over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he groaned and said to his wife: ‘What is to become of us? How are we to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for ourselves?’” Everybody knows what happened then. The children were abandoned in the forest and eventually found their way to a gingerbread house, where lived an old woman who wanted to cook and eat them.

THE NEXT DISASTER TO STRIKE WAS the arrival of the Black Death. In 1348-49 various regions of France lost between one quarter and a half, and in some cases up to 80 to 90 percent, of their population. The plague returned in 1361 and 1374, followed by smaller outbreaks roughly once every 10 years. By the end of the fourteenth century, the population of France was less than half of what it had been in 1300.
