Experiments employing the public goods and similar games have now been conducted by many teams of investigators in many countries. In some studies, stakes were very high—equivalent to three months of salary. The general result is always the same. A substantial proportion of moralistic subjects always behaves in a cooperative, rather than rational fashion, and many people are willing to incur personal costs to punish cheaters. This is not to say, however, that all social groups are alike in their composition with respect to knaves, saints, and moralists. College students, for example, tend to be more cooperative than subjects coming from less-educated and poorer social strata. Graduate students in economics, on the other hand, tend to behave more selfishly than students from other disciplines (probably because they learn too much about rational choice in their classes!). Most interestingly, the strength of cooperative behavior tends to vary among different countries. Particularly good evidence for cross-cultural variation comes from studies that used the “ultimatum game,” which is simpler to set up and cheaper than the public goods game.

The ultimatum game is played between two people, the “proposer” and the “responder.” Anonymous subjects are paired for a single interaction (which precludes any possibility of reciprocal altruism based on preexisting long-term relationships). The task is to divide up “the pot” of $10. The proposer offers a certain proportion of the pot to the responder. (The proposal must be expressed in whole dollars.) If the responder accepts, the proposer keeps the rest of the pot. If the responder rejects the offer, nobody gets anything. If this game is played by purely self-interested agents, the theory predicts that the responder should accept any nonzero offer. Knowing this, the rational proposer will offer the minimum nonzero amount, which is $1. On the other hand, if the responder is a moralist, he will reject any offer deemed unfair. In a society with a strong norm of fairness, the moralistic responders will insist on the 50:50 division of the pot. They will certainly reject offers of one or two dollars. Knowing this, even a knavish proposer will make a fair offer. By now it should come as no surprise that in no real society that has been investigated with the ultimatum game, people behave according to the prediction of the self-interest hypothesis.
