THE CAROLINGIAN FRONTIER WITH ISLAM took shape during the eighth century. In 711, an army of 7,000 Berber infantry and 300 Arab cavalry invaded Spain and destroyed the Christian army in the battle on the Guadalete. The Visigothic kingdom collapsed, and by 719 the Saracens drove the remaining Christians into the mountains of Galicia and Asturia. The Muslims then crossed the Pyrenees and invaded France, but were defeated by Charlemagne’s grandfather Charles Martel, “The Hammer,” in the battle of Tours in 732. The Muslim wave crested, and after that they began their centuries-long retreat. By 759, they were expelled from France, and in 777 the Franks led by Charlemagne crossed into Spain. This campaign, however, ended in disaster. As Charlemagne’s army returned to France through the Pass of Roncesvalles, its rearguard was cut to pieces by the Basques. Despite this disaster, in 801 Charlemagne captured Barcelona and established the Spanish March in Catalonia.

This battle of Roncesvalles inspired the eleventh-century Song of Roland, in which Roland, a loyal and courageous, but proud and rash vassal of Charlemagne, is ambushed by demonic Saracens and dies together with 20,000 Franks of the rearguard. But his sacrifice is not in vain because he is fighting for God and Christianity. Charlemagne returns with the main army, defeats the Saracens, forces more than 100,000 “pagans” to convert to Christianity and kills those who refuse. Note the similarities with the Stroganov Chronicle: Both texts depict the struggle across the metaethnic frontier in stark black-and-white terms. Both characterize the enemy as “pagan,” although Islam, similarly to Christianity, is a monotheistic religion.

When the Muslims destroyed the kingdom of the Visigoths, they settled in the rich southern region of Andalusia with the capital in Córdoba. The Visigothic remnants hung on by the skin of their teeth in the mountainous north. When the Christians retreated north, they removed the population and razed the fortifications and settlements. The Muslims kept pressure on the Christians in the north with annual raids, but did not attempt to settle the abandoned area. As a result, a wide swath of territory running through the middle of the Iberian Peninsula between the Muslim and Christian areas became essentially empty of all population. This was a classical metaethnic frontier. It separated two monotheistic world religions utterly opposed to each other. It was also a significant cultural and economic fault line. Andalusia was a wealthy urbanized society with literate elites. Its capital, Córdoba, was the largest city in Europe after Constantinople. By contrast, the Christian society in the north was rude, unlettered, poor, and rural. The populations of its largest “cities” such as Barcelona or Santiago were a hundred times smaller than Córdoba’s.
