But it is not just quantification that is interesting about Dupuy’s work. During the last several decades, history has been rapidly quantified (there is even a new scientific branch of history, called cliometrics—from Clio, Muse of history, and metrikos, “measure”), and many kinds of numeric data are now available. What’s interesting is the particular quantity that Dupuy succeeded in measuring. Many people would probably think that “fighting spirit” is somehow soft and “squishy.” We’ve already seen that most mainstream philosophers of history rejected theories such as that of Ibn Khaldun as “softening of the fiber” or “mystical explanations.” Fighting spirit would surely fall under the same category, in the thinking of these scholars. The best rebuttal to such criticisms is to show that you can measure the quantity by applying standard statistical methods to data. The success of Dupuy in quantifying combat efficiencies of Germans, Americans, and British during World War II shows that the critics are wrong. Consistency among national estimates of combat efficiencies for different divisions shows that the statistically derived measures reflect some real property of the societies that produced these divisions. Also, I have only discussed the best data set analyzed by Dupuy. But he and others looked at other time periods and combatants. For example, it turns out that the Germans show a marked superiority over the Allies during World War I. The analysis of the Arab-Israeli wars indicates that the Israelis enjoyed a twofold advantage in combat efficiency ratings over the Egyptians, Syrians, and Jordanians. Remember that when Dupuy estimated combat efficiency he took into account any differences in weapon superiority, so it reflects the seemingly intangible qualities of these nations—such as the asabiyas of their armies.

This is very encouraging, but combat efficiency is only one aspect—the military one—of the overall asabiya of a society. Can we use scientific methods to quantify nonmilitary facets of the capacity for collective action? A very interesting and quite recent development in political science says yes. I now turn to the work of Robert Putnam and others on something they call “social capital.”

Chapter 13

The Bowling Alley in History

Measuring the Decline of Social Capital

In 1993, Robert Putnam published Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. “Social capital,” as Putnam explains, “refers to features of social organization, such as trust, norms, and networks that can improve the efficiency of society by facilitating coordinated actions.” Putnam’s social capital is asabiya for modern democratic societies, with an emphasis on its nonmilitary aspects. Along with a growing number of professional scientists and lay readers, I applaud Putnam’s work, but I prefer Ibn Khaldun’s term asabiya, acknowledging as it does the long history of this particular approach to the understanding of human affairs.
