The wealthy classes were also the first to volunteer extra taxes when they were needed. One of the best examples of such behavior comes again from the Second Punic War, when the internal cohesion of Rome was tested to what would be a breaking point for almost any other state. When the state ran out of money, the propertied classes agreed to pay a surcharge to provide for salaries for galley crews. A graduated scale was used in which the senators paid the most, followed by the knights, and then other citizens. In addition, officers and centurions (but not common soldiers!) served without pay, saving the state 20 percent of a legion’s payroll. Finally, the equestrian businessmen who supplied the army and the fleet agreed to accept promissory notes in lieu of actual payments, which the state simply did not have. In short, everybody sacrificed for the sake of victory, but the greatest burden was placed on the wealthy.

When the leaders do not hide behind rank and shoulder their share of the common burden, the common people are much more likely to fall in line. This is perhaps why the plebs and the aristocracy had coexisted in rather harmonious relations with each other during the early and middle Republic. Even during the most class conflict-ridden decades of the fifth century, the commons never revolted outright. Were they to start a revolution, they would have made short work of the nobility. Plebeian infantrymen heavily outnumbered the aristocratic knights (by a factor of more than 10 to 1—a typical legion had 4,200 infantry and 300 cavalry). The great majority of plebeians were veterans. They could easily self-organize into an army by electing centurions and higher officers from among their ranks, and then slaughter all the upper classes. But they never did so, instead relying on a peaceful direct social action, in their refusal to provide recruits, to press their claims. After the social problems were resolved in the fourth century, and until the next period of social instability during the late Republic, the relations between the aristocracy and the commons were quite harmonious.
