ONE OF THE MOST STRIKING historical trends in France during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries was massive population growth. In 1100, about six million people inhabited the territory within the modern national borders of France. By 1300, the population more than tripled and reached a level between 20 and 22 million. The rest of Western Europe experienced a similar population buildup. We are on firm ground when it comes to tracing the dynamics of the population of England. In 1086, William the Conqueror, who wanted to know just how many new subjects he had acquired by his conquest of England, conducted a massive census whose results were preserved in the Domesday Book. Using this information, modern historians estimate that there were around two million people in England at the end of the eleventh century Two centuries later, there were close to six million.

The population increase put the productive means of the medieval society under a collossal strain. All land that could be cultivated was turned into fields. In the process, more than 30 million acres of forests—one quarter of the modern area of France—were destroyed to make room for agriculture. Land was worked more intensively by shifting from the two-field to the three-field system. Instead of letting land rest every other year, each field was cultivated every two years out of three. As a result of increases in cultivated area and the switch to the three-field system, the amount of food produced in France probably doubled during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. But the number of mouths to be fed increased threefold, with the inevitable result that the per-capita food consumption declined.

In An Essay on the Principle of Population, published in 1798, the English economist Thomas Robert Malthus argued that when population increases beyond the means of subsistence food prices increase, real wages (that is, wages expressed in terms of purchasing power) decline, and per-capita consumption, especially among the poorer strata, drops. By the early fourteenth century, France found itself in a classical Malthusian trap. A clear indicator of increased Malthusian pressures was thirteenth-century inflation. The price of the main staple, wheat, more than doubled between 1200 and 1300. Similar price increases took place in England and Italy. Other commodities were also affected. For example, in the twelfth century, an ox could be bought in England for three shillings. By the beginning of the thirteenth century, the average price was already six shillings. Toward the end of the century, the price of oxen doubled yet again.
