But social channel capacity cannot be developed beyond a certain point—we cannot remember everyone on Earth, let alone what they have done to one another. As the size of the group increases, the number of relationships to remember explodes. If you belong to a group of 5 people, you only need to keep track of 10 separate relationships. If the group has 20 people, however, you need to remember 190 two-way relationships. The group size increased fourfold, but the number of relationships almost twenty-fold. Among the primates, humans live in the largest groups, and have the largest brains, but a limit is inescapable. “The figure of 150,” estimates the British anthropologist Robin Dunbar, “seems to represent the maximum number of individuals with whom we can have a genuinely social relationship, the kind of relationship that goes with knowing who they are and how they relate to us. Putting it another way, it’s the number of people you would not feel embarrassed about joining uninvited for a drink if you happened to bump into them in a bar.” It turns out that the “magic number” of 150 is very close to the average size of villages in hunter-gatherer societies. Gladwell has cited many other examples of how the magic number crops up again and again—from military units to the maximum size of agricultural settlements allowed in the Hutterite sect, which originated in Central Europe in the sixteenth century, and moved to America in the twentieth.

Although our social channel capacity puts a limit on the number of people with whom we can maintain face-to-face relationships, group selection continued to favor social groups that could put out larger armies (or develop larger and thus more efficient economies) than their rivals. Evolution had to find another way for humans to distinguish between those with whom to cooperate and those who should be killed on the spot. And it did.

One aspect of human cognition that I have not yet touched on is our capacity for symbolic thinking. The distinctly human ability to invent and manipulate symbols was an important aspect of evolution of ultrasociality. In fact, as the Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky (1896-1934) and his school argued, all higher forms of human cognition have social origins.
