It is easy to imagine how prosocial behaviors that benefit the group could evolve in early humans. Consider, for example, the following theoretical scenario of evolution of moralistic punishment. Suppose our apelike ancestors had already evolved the behavior that I will call “familial moralism”—cooperate with close relatives and punish any of them who attempts to free-ride. The punishment part is important, because we know that relatives do not all automatically cooperate. Any family can have a “black sheep” or a prodigal son. Or a daughter who refuses to sacrifice herself for the benefit of the family, when she rejects an old and repulsive but wealthy suitor. Sanctions are needed to keep family members in line, from spanking a naughty child to disinheriting a disobedient daughter or a wild nephew. Evolution of this behavior is noncontroversial because it is driven by kin selection. Kin groups consisting of familial moralists would be able to achieve a higher degree of cooperation, and greater fitness, than groups consisting of those who cooperate with relatives, but do not punish uncooperative ones. As a result, familial moralism will spread through the population.

Now suppose that a cognitive mutation arises in a population of familial moralists. Instead of limiting cooperation (and punishment of noncooperators) to relatives only, these mutants also—“mistakenly”—cooperate with unrelated people they know, friends. Although I am describing here a hypothetical scenario, it is likely that human sociality evolved precisely by this kind of mutation. Just think how readily kinship terms enter our discourse when we want to promote cooperation—a band of brothers, the father of a nation, or our motherland.

Once the true (as opposed to familial) moralistic behavior arose, groups containing moralists acquired the ability to raise larger war bands, because they were not limited to relatives. Cooperation within the enlarged war parties was sustained by moralistic punishment of free-riders, so that they were as cohesive as the smaller parties consisting of familial moralists. Thus, group-level selection favored the spread of true moralistic behaviors. At the same time, within-group (individual) selection against the moralists was extremely weak, because after the moralists tip the group over to a cooperative equilibrium, punishments become so infrequent that they hardly impose any costs on the moralists. Slowly but surely, large bands dominated by moralists displaced smaller groups in which the only basis of cooperation was kinship.
