The boundary between the nobility and the commons was not sharp, because some yeomen enjoyed incomes substantially greater than £5 per annum. At the same time, a member of lesser gentry with the borderline annual income of £5 (or 25 livres in France) could not afford to properly equip himself for war, the supposed raison-d’ètre of his estate. A horse together with armor and weapons cost in the neighborhood of £20, or four times as much as his annual income! Trained warhorses capable of bearing a knight in plate armor were sold in the late thirteenth century for astronomical sums in the range of £40 to £80.

The population surge of the High Middle Ages, as discussed earlier, brought impoverishment and increasing hardship to the great majority of the population. But the noble landowners, unlike the poor, generally prof ited from the economic trends of the thirteenth century. The value of their main product, grain, increased as a result of price inflation, while their costs, wages to agricultural workers, declined. Alternatively, they could rent their land at the greatly inflated rates of the late thirteenth century. Furthermore, whereas the price of such basic consumption items as food and fuel, without which humans cannot survive, increased enormously, the price of manufactured goods increased much less, or even declined. This happened because demographic growth reduced the cost of human labor, which was a major part of the price of manufactured goods. Suddenly, the nobility found themselves flush with money, which they could spend on luxuries and conspicuous consumption. Merchants responded to the increase in noble purchasing power by importing more luxuries from overseas, while urban entrepreneurs, employing the cheap labor migrating from the country to towns, greatly expanded production. As a result, the thirteenth century saw a great expansion of trade, the rise of arts and crafts, and urbanization. A class of wealthy merchants and entrepreneurs, catering to the noble needs, arose in towns. The great boom of Gothic architecture was also an indirect result of these economic trends—the lay and ecclesiastical landowners had a lot of money to burn, and conspicuous consumption could take the form of buying gorgeous clothes, or of building the most magnificent church in Christendom.

The thirteenth century, thus, saw two contradictory trends. On one hand the demographic pressure was rising, the standard of living of the great majority of the population was falling, and an ever-increasing proportion of people were pushed to the brink of disaster. On the other hand, the wealthy and powerful were enjoying a golden age. The warning signs of the troubles to come were there, but were not perceived. Who cares what happens to the great unwashed multitudes? Because the texts in the thirteenth century were written for the elite, and in a large degree by the elite, it is also easy for modern historians to miss the signs of the impending disaster.
