War and Peace and Particles

The Science of History

War and Peace by Leo Tolstoy is not only one of the most revered novels ever written, it is also a treatise on the science of history. Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910) lived during the golden age of classical physics, when it seemed that a complete understanding of the physical world was almost in sight. (The discovery of relativity and quantum mechanics in the early twentieth century showed that this was an illusion.) Tolstoy must have asked himself whether the methods that worked so well in physics could be applied to the study of history—precisely the premise with which we started on our search for a new kind of theoretical history.

Two triumphs of classical physics inspired Tolstoy to think about how mathematical history could be conceived. One was the invention of differential and integral calculus, which allowed Isaac Newton (1642-1727) and others to develop the equations of planetary motion. The second was the statistical mechanics developed by, among others, Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749-1827). Laplace saw the universe as a huge collection of bodies and particles, all obeying Newton’s laws of motion. He argued that if we only could determine the positions and velocities of all these bodies at one point in time, then in principle we could calculate their trajectories as far in the future as we wanted. From this, Laplace deduced that the universe is completely deterministic. There was no place for anything like free will in his vision of how the world worked.

We now know that this notion of determinism is wrong. For one thing, particles at the subatomic level behave in a stochastic—completely erratic and unpredictable—manner, and modern physics has been unable to reduce their behavior to the action of deterministic laws. It is quite possible that the universe, at some very basic level, is not deterministic at all. Second, complex systems, and the universe is certainly a complex system, can behave in a chaotic manner. When a system behaves chaotically, tiny perturbations make its future trajectory completely unpredictable. A little electron deciding to jump from one orbit to another will completely change the course of a chaotic dynamical system.
