Archaeological and toponymic (place names) evidence suggests that there was a very substantial immigration into North France by Germanic farmers. They were probably the dominant element north of the Seine, becoming sparser as one moved south toward the Loire. Eventually, all these colonizers converted to Christianity and assimilated to the Romance language. Although the contemporary sources called them “the Franks,” they were now divided from their brethren living in the Rhine area by language. (The Frankish language, belonging to the Germanic linguistic group was a direct ancestor of the modern Flemish.) The inhabitants of North France, thus, were of very diverse ethnic origin (which is a typical situation on the metaethnic fault line). The Celtic population who inhabited this region when it was conquered by Caesar were already a mongrel people. To this substrate were added Roman legionnaires and their dependents who were brought in to defend the frontier, and the Germanic farmers who moved into the area when it was added to the Frankish realm (and there was to be another infusion of Germanic people from Scandinavia, as discussed shortly). After the empire of Charlemagne broke up in the ninth century, it gradually became clear that, despite their diverse ethnic origins, the people of North France had developed a distinct ethnic identity. When the German Empire was reconstituted under the Ottonian and Salian dynasties, Francia stayed out of it.

The incorporation of the kingdom of Syagrius into the Frankish Empire should have been the end of the frontier in North France, but for a quirk of history. During the fifth century, Roman Britain descended into anarchy and was abandoned by the legions. Internal weakness invited first raiding and then colonization by Picts, Irish, Saxons, Angles, Jutes, and Frisians. Many British (Celtic) chieftains and their dependents fled from the chaos and established themselves across the English Channel in Armorica. British migration to Armorica continued during the sixth century, and the area became known as Brittany (“Little Britain”) and its Celtic inhabitants as Bretons. For some reason (perhaps because they detested Germanic invaders who drove them out of Britain), the Bretons conceived an abiding hatred for the Franks, and started raiding into Francia. The Franks attempted to conquer Brittany on several occasions and once managed to occupy the peninsula briefly. But the Franks were never able to sustain their political control over the Bretons, and had to establish the March of Brittany to guard against the Breton pressure.
