“So all the prelates of the Church, bishops and abbots, all the nobility, lords and kings, the provost of the merchants of Paris and the burgesses, and the councillors of the French towns, met together in Paris to consider how the realm should be governed until their king should be set free. They also wanted to find out what happened to the vast sums which had been raised in the past through tithes, levies on capital, forced loans, coinings of new money and all other extortionate measures by which the population had been tormented and oppressed while the soldiers remained underpaid and the country inadequately protected, but of these matters no one was able to give an account.”

The assembly elected 12 representatives from each of the 3 estates. “It was then decided by common consent that these 36 persons should meet frequently in Paris to discuss the affairs of the realm and put them in order.... As a first measure, the Three Estates stopped the coining of the money then being minted and took possession of the dies. Secondly, they required the dauphin to arrest his father’s chancellor, with Sir Robert de Lorris, Sir Simon de Bucy, Jean Poillevillain and other financial officers and former counselors of the king, in order that they should render a true account of all the funds which had been levied and collected on their advice. When these high officials heard of this, they completely disappeared and were wise to do so. They left the kingdom of France as quickly as they could and went to live in other countries until the situation should have changed. Next they appointed on their own authority officials with the duty of raising and collecting all the levies, taxes, tithes, loans, and other duties payable to the crown and they had new coinage of fine gold minted, called moutons.” By taking over the functions that were always the prerogative of the crown, the Council of Thirty-Six has accomplished what amounts to a coup-d’etat.

The key leader from the third estate to emerge in the revolutionary ferment of 1356-1358 was Etienne Marcel, the provost of merchants (basically, the mayor of Paris). Marcel was a member of the class of urban merchants and businessmen who had achieved great wealth during the previous century and now wanted to translate it into power and status. Several of Marcel’s relatives had already achieved noble rank. A cousin bought a patent of nobility for 500 livres; Marcel’s father-in-law and brother-in-law, starting as wealthy merchants in Rouen, became ennobled in the royal service. The tactics that Marcel used was mobilization of the urban masses of Paris as shock troops in wringing concessions from the dauphin-regent.
