The concept of a “civilizational fault line” was popularized by the political scientist Samuel P. Huntington in his 1996 book The Clash of Civilizations. Huntington argued that after the collapse of the Soviet Union, different countries began aligning themselves not along the ideological divide between communism and liberalism, but reverted to older sources of large-scale identity, based on belonging to various world civilizations. Huntington’s thesis provoked a storm of controversy, and I myself could quibble with many of the points that he raised. Nevertheless, the decade since he wrote the book has amply demonstrated that his main insight is correct. The events of 9/11 and the wars that the United States subsequently waged in Afghanistan and Iraq are precisely the kind of a “fault-line war” that he predicted.

Huntington was concerned exclusively with contemporary politics, but the concept of the “clash of civilizations” proves to be illuminating when we analyze the past. The word civilization, however, does not sit well as a description of such historical groups as the Germans or Eurasian nomads. I prefer to use metaethnic community (from the Greek meta, “beyond,” and ethnos, “ethnic group” or “nation”) for large-scale supranational entities of this kind; this term includes both the traditional civilizations and cultural groupings that are not usually included in the standard lists of civilizations. Another example of a metaethnic community, which is not usually treated as a civilization, is the Celtic world of the first millennium B.C. Each metaethnic community is unified by some sort of shared identity, which is usually based on religion or another form of ideology (for example, Confucianism). However, the most important aspect of the metaethnic identity is the dividing line between “us” and “them.” A metaethnic community cannot coalesce until it is confronted with a significantly different other. The rise of Germania on the Roman frontier is one example of that. A modern example is the formation of the “African civilization.” Prior to the conquest of the sub-Saharan Africa by Western powers in the nineteenth century, the Africans had no sense of shared identity. But shared experience of first colonization, then decolonization, and now the tendency of the rest of the world to lump them together created the conditions for a gradual emergence of the African community. This metaethnic identity is still quite fragile (and not all authorities agree that sub-Saharan Africa qualifies as a separate civilization), but it seems to be slowly strengthening.
