The eastward expansion resumed during the reign of Conrad III (1138-52). The pressure for the crusade came from the grass roots, not the emperors. Conrad himself did not get involved in any way. The expansion was orchestrated by the marcher lords, such as Henry the Lion, duke of Saxony, and Albert the Bear, margrave of Brandenburg. The ideological cover was provided by the pope, who authorized the German crusade against the Slavs in 1147. The motivations of the crusaders were the usual mixture of ideology and self-interest. “The pagans are evil,” wrote the bishop of Magdeburg in 1108, “but their land is good in meat, honey, flour, and poultry, and when it is tilled, full of rich harvests beyond compare. Thus say those who know it. Therefore, oh you Saxons, Franks, Lorainers, and Flemings, you famous men and conquerors of the world, here you can save your souls and if it pleases you, gain the best land for your dwelling.”

This time East Germany was conquered for good, and Henry the Lion began the push into lands east of the Elbe. In 1226, a new player appeared on the scene—the Teutonic Order. The Teutonic knights responded to an appeal from the Polish duke Conrad of Masovia for aid against the pagan Prussians. Conrad gave them Kulmerland as a base, and promised them whatever territory they conquered from the Prussians. In 1237, the Teutonic Order merged with the Livonian Brothers of the Sword, who were based in Latvia, and the crusading knights pushed away from the Baltic littoral. Prussian resistance was brutally put down. The suppression was marked by a large-scale genocide against the native Baits, followed by forced Christianization and Germanization of the survivors. At the same time, the newly conquered lands received a steady flow of colonists—Westphalian nobles, Cistercian monks, Flemish and German merchants, and peasants from Saxony, the Netherlands, and Denmark.
