No, it does not make sense to ask why one part of the Roman Empire lingered on for more than a millennium after the heartland collapsed. Instead, we should ask why a new imperial nation was born in the Balkans-Anatolia area when the old one collapsed. Confusion arises because the nation at the core of the Byzantine Empire called themselves “the Romans” (Romaioi in Greek), and their state the “Roman Empire.” A little reflection, however, makes it clear that the medieval Byzantines were an entirely separate people from the Romans of antiquity. (This is why modern historians invented the name Byzantine—from Byzantion, the name of the Greek town on which site Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, was built in the fourth century.) Just designating themselves as “the Romans,” however, is not a sufficient reason to equate this later people with the Romans. For example, there is a modern country whose citizens still call themselves “the Romans”: Romania. In general, an appropriation of an old and glorious ethnonym (“a name of a nation”) is a common thing in history. The French call themselves the “Franks,” but Germans also lay a claim to the Frankish legacy. (There is a province in Germany called Frankonia.) The Russians think of themselves as direct descendants of the Kievan Rus, a claim that is hotly contested by the Ukrainian nationalists.

Apart from the name, the Romans and the nation that we now call the Byzantines had almost nothing in common. They spoke different languages (Latin versus Greek), practiced different religions (paganism versus Christianity), and their core territories were in different parts of Europe. They also had a different political organization—the Byzantines were ruled by an avtokrator who, at least in theory, had a total power over all matters of life and death, whereas the Romans were a republican people. (Even during the imperial period, the legal fiction was that the emperor was only a princeps—“the first among the senatorial class.”) The substance of power might not have changed a lot, but its external trappings and the ideological basis did. Princeps was legitimized via election by the senate, whereas the avtokrator’s legitimacy stemmed from the divine mandate. The Byzantines and the Romans even dressed differently—by A.D. 500, the Roman toga was replaced in the Empire with oriental-style long brocaded coats.
