“For a year he went back to his studies and his family, forgetting Iraq and jihad. But the scandal of prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib woke him up, he said. His wife, a religious student working on her Master’s thesis, urged him to leave everything and go for jihad in Iraq. ‘She told me they are doing this to the men, imagine what is happening to the women now. Imagine your sisters and me being raped by the infidel American pigs.’ He suddenly realized his mistake, he said, and spent the night crying.

“The next day he borrowed money for another journey—one that he described as his last. He was given a contact name in Aleppo, a city in the north of Syria, who would arrange for him to be smuggled across the border. ‘I didn’t tell anyone, I just told my wife. I borrowed a car from a friend and we went out to do some shopping. She bought me two trousers and a shirt. We went then to my father’s house. I told my mother, forgive me if I had done anything wrong. She said, why? I told her nothing, I just want forgiveness from you and dad. She asked me if I was going to Baghdad. I said no. She hugged me and cried.’

“The fighter told how he went back home and sat with his wife and children, who had no idea that this was their last dinner with their father. ‘My favorite daughter came and sat in my lap and slept there. She opened her eyes and said, ‘Daddy, I love you’.’ Weeping as he spoke, he said: ‘You know these memories are the work of the devil trying to soften my heart and bring me back home. The only place I am going from here is heaven.”’

TODAY THE MOST VIOLENT CLASH of civilizations occurs on the metaethnic frontiers of Islam with the Western, Orthodox, Hindu, and Sinic civilizations. Previously, I took a brief look at how this civilizational conflict is influencing the internal cohesion of the core states of the Western and Orthodox civilizations, the U.S. and Russia. But a metaethnic frontier exerts its transformative role on the asabiyas of people on both sides of the fault line. Just as the Americans and Russians feel the pressure from aggressive Islamist groups, the Muslim societies are also under enormous stress from other World metaethnic communities. It is not surprising that the metaethnic frontiers in Kashmir, the Balkans, Northern Caucasus, and Xinjang are a constant source of conflict. As the story of the Yemeni in Fallujah reminds us, however, the hottest spot of trouble is in the Middle East.

Until the nineteenth century, the metaethnic frontiers between the West and Islam were situated far from the core of the Muslim world. But when the Ottoman Empire began crumbling, the Western great powers started encroaching on this core. Egypt became a protectorate of Britain in 1882, and Iraq and Syria became the British and French zones in the aftermath of World War I. From 1920, hundreds of thousands of Jewish immigrants flowed into Palestine. In 1948, the state of Israel was established by the U.N.
