The frontier, by contrast, had a much flatter social hierarchy, because it lacked both the top of the pyramid and its bottom. Large estates were present only in the northern areas of the frontier, and were greatly outnumbered by petty servicemen living closer to the defensive lines. The frontier areas suffered from a chronic lack of population, so land was plentiful. There were no landless peasants, and anybody could cultivate as much land as needed. Sparse population also meant that military commanders had great difficulties in finding enough men for the garrisons guarding the frontier. The need for troops was so desperate that they were willing to enroll persons from any social background. Over time, there was a transfer of manpower from the category of taxpaying peasants to the category of hereditary servicemen. Most of the servicemen cultivated their land themselves ; few of them had any significant number of peasants. The central government did not like that there were so few peasants on the frontier and so many servicemen because it meant receiving less in taxes, but the necessity of maintaining the defenses against the Tatars was paramount. During the 1640s, the authorities confiscated the magnate-owned land within the frontier, freed the peasants, and enlisted them in dragoon regiments for garrison service. The new servicemen supported themselves on the land confiscated from the previous owners. At the same time, the government also invited all impoverished servicemen from the central regions to move south, where they were given land and enlisted in the frontier defense forces.

The unusual social composition, dominated by small landowners liable to military service, was another significant factor promoting a cooperative spirit in the frontier territories. Great differences in rank and wealth are divisive. It is much easier for equals to achieve the unity of purpose and to develop a common course of action. Egalitarianism enables cooperation.

ONCE AGAIN, SOME READERS, ESPECIALLY THOSE who have read books on Russian history, might ask whether I am painting too rosy a picture of the Russian frontier society. Don’t the history books tell us that Muscovy was an “oriental despotism”? That peasants were harshly oppressed? That even nobles had no rights, and could be whipped with the knout (“leather whip”) or even executed at the tsar’s slightest whim? Is it really possible to speak about cooperation, and especially egalitarianism, in such a society?
