A recent experiment, conducted in Zurich by Fehr and colleagues, confirms that emotions play a strong role in moralistic punishment. As in other studies, the experiment involved human subjects playing a variant of the public goods game. The new twist was that the researchers scanned brain activity of the subjects who were contemplating whether to punish a cheater. The brain scan showed that when a player was deciding on punishment, a spike of neural activity occurred in the region of brain known as the caudate nucleus. The stronger the nucleus fired, the greater was the fine imposed by the subject on the norm violator. The caudate nucleus is known to be involved in the processing of rewards. More specifically, it has an important role in integrating reward information with goal-oriented behavior. The implication of the experimental findings, therefore, is that the subjects were anticipating the satisfaction of punishing the cheaters. The individuals who derived more pleasure from revenge (whose caudate nuclei fired particularly intensely) were willing to fork out more dollars to impose a heavier fine on the cheater.

Other groups of researchers in New Jersey, Texas, and California are also busily scanning brains of experimental subjects contemplating social choices—to trust or not? To punish or not? A whole new hot discipline, called neuro-economics, was born in the last few years. The results churned out by different research groups are striking. They indicate that the capacity for trust and moralistic punishment are wired into our brains. At some level, they are as basic as our abilities of obtaining food or finding mates. It does not mean that all humans will always behave in a cooperative manner. People are different—some are knaves, others moralists. Societies differ in their ability to sustain collective action. But the capacity for cooperation (even if it is never exercised by many people) is part of what makes us human. Machiavelli was wrong.
