Wages paid to carpenters and masons or for performing agricultural works, such as threshing, also increased, but did not keep pace with inflation. Scholars in the multivolume compendium Agricultural History of England and Wales estimated that during the thirteenth century the real wage of English laborers declined by one third. This means that if in 1200 a worker’s daily wage could buy three loaves of bread, by 1300 he had enough money only for two.

These economic trends were the result of an inexorable operation of the laws of economics. The law of supply and demand says that if demand for some commodity increases and is not matched by increased supply, the price of the commodity must go up. Conversely, if the supply goes up, the price declines. Increased population meant greater demand for food, whereas food production lagged—therefore food prices went up. Greater number of people also meant an increased supply of labor, therefore the price of labor (wages) went down. Another commodity in limited supply was agricultural land, and its price was also driven up by the greater demand resulting from population growth. At the beginning of the thirteenth century, an acre of land in Normandy cost 2 livres; a century later it went for 20 livres. Much the same trend was observed in Picardy. Land rents paid by peasants to landowners also increased drastically. Around Lille in Picardy, rents grew fivefold in just 40 years between 1276 and 1316. In England around 1250, a peasant could rent an acre for between 2 and 4 pence. By 1300, he could not find it for less than 12 pence. In the early fourteenth century, land rents in many English shires shot up to 30 pence per acre and above.

Using information on medieval yields, economic historians have calculated that the minimum amount of land needed to a French peasant family for comfortable living was 15 acres; incidentally, working with independent sources of data the English historians arrived at the same estimate. After paying the tithe to the Church and the tax to the crown, and reserving enough seed grain for the next year’s planting, the peasant would have enough left to feed and clothe a family of four or five. In a year of a bad harvest, the family would have to tighten their belts, but it did not have to starve. The problem is that by 1300 only one peasant household in five had 15 or more acres. Thus, the majority of rural households did not have enough land to feed themselves, and their very survival critically depended on securing outside employment. The result of this process was a vast and growing rural proletariat. But there was not enough work for everybody. In a vain hope of finding employment, many of the landless peasants migrated to towns, where they swelled the ranks of the urban unemployed, beggars, and vagrants.
