During the thirteenth century, East Germany became a melting pot that swallowed diverse peoples, from pagan Slavs to Flemish merchants, and turned them all into Germans. Its northern part, the province of Brandenburg with its capital in Berlin, was to become the core from which Germany became unified many centuries later. Other areas that were heavily colonized by Germans were Pomerania along the Baltic shore (western Pomerania is now in Poland), Prussia (now partly in Poland, and partly the Russian region of Kaliningrad), and Silesia, lying along the Upper Oder (now also in Poland). These four areas became the core around which modern Germany crystallized during the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries. The rise of Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany was rapid. “In 1640, when Fredrick William of Hohenzollern, the Great Elector, came to power in Brandenburg, Prussia was a poor and remote province which he held in fief from the Polish crown, while his other territories lay scattered widely through the Germanies. But when the Great Elector died in 1688, Brandenburg-Prussia had become a garrison state, in which all available resources were concentrated upon the task of sustaining a large and efficient standing army. Frederick William and his officials allowed nothing to stand in the way of this goal. Noble privileges, provincial and town immunities, guild and even village customs all were coordinated, adjusted, and if need be suppressed in order to produce the greatest possible military strength. As a result, what had been poor, weak, and disparate territories were knitted together into an administrative unity which proved capable of not only defending itself, but also providing an effective base from which the authority of the house of Hohenzollern could be extended to new lands” writes William McNeill in The Rise of the West. In other words, Prussia was yet another “society organized for war.”

Brandenburg, Prussia, Pomerania, and Silesia were all products of the Drang nach Osten, and during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries these former frontier provinces became the core of the resurgent Germany. It is ironic that the greater part of the real core of the modern Germany now lies outside it. A result of the defeat of the Third Reich, it is not an irony Adolf Hitler would have enjoyed.
