WHAT DOES IT MEAN FOR OUR theories of social and economic dynamics? First, there is no need to flush the theory of rational choice down the drain. Science typically advances in an incremental way, by building on earlier successes, and the development of our ideas about cooperation is not an exception to this principle. Remember that the theory assumes that rational agents maximize a “utility function,” which in the general case need not be only material self-interest. It is quite straightforward to include in the utility function the prosocial inclinations of some individuals, and in fact theoretical economists have already started doing that. This research shows that in some kinds of circumstances prosocial inclinations do not matter, and we obtain results identical to the classical theory built on the self-interest assumption. Take price formation in the markets, one of the greatest successes of the classical theory, as developed by Adam Smith. Moralistic individuals may bitch and moan about not getting the “fair price,” but the invisible hand of the market will inexorably set the price at the level determined by supply and demand.

In other kinds of situations, prosocial norms held by part of the population will result in an outcome completely at variance with the standard theory. Take the example with which this chapter started. From the point of view of the self-interest hypothesis, massive volunteering for the army is incomprehensible. But being familiar with the results from the public goods game and similar experiments, it is easy to understand what went on. The initial surge of volunteers must have been entirely saints and moralists. After enough moralists joined up, they put a lot of pressure on the knaves to do the same. In England during World War I, particularly effective were the female moralists who could not serve themselves but had husbands and sons in the army. Here’s an eyewitness account by William Brooks, who joined the army in 1915: “Once war broke out the situation at home became awful, because people did not like to see men or lads of army age walking about in civilian clothing, or not in uniform of some sort, especially in a military town like Woolwich. Women were the worst. They would come up to you in the street and give you a white feather, or stick it in the lapel of your coat. A white feather is the sign of cowardice, so they meant you were a coward and that you should be in the army doing your bit for king and country. It got so bad it wasn’t safe to go out. So in 1915 at the age of 17 I volunteered under the Lord Derby scheme. Now that was a thing where once you applied to join you were not called up at once, but were given a blue armband with a red crown to wear. This told people that you were waiting to be called up, and that kept you safe, or fairly safe, because if you were seen to be wearing it for too long the abuse in the street would soon start again.”
