Conspicuous consumption is inherently divisive because it draws boundaries between the haves and the have-nots. It elicits envy and weakens solidarity. But it is even more important as a symptom of deeper processes—growing inequality and within-group competition for resources and power that gradually undermine group solidarity.

A TURNING POINT WAS THUS CROSSED during the second century B.C. Whereas the Roman aristocrats of the early Republic competed in who could die for patria in the most glorious way, in the late Republic they competed in who could throw the most sumptuous banquet. In 275 B.C., possession of 10 pounds of silver plate was considered as “anti-social behavior,” two centuries later possession of 10,000 pounds of silver was a source of pride for the owner.

Socially disintegrative forces were also affecting the commoners. A small minority of them grew in wealth and aspired to join the ranks of the elite; whereas the majority lost their land holdings and were forced to work the land of the rich, to drift to the cities, where they swelled the urban proletariat, or to join the legions. The huge pool of potential recruits, destitute and desperate, was later one of the main factors driving the civil wars of the first century

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we need to factor in the effect of slavery. The Roman conquest of the Mediterranean during the second century B.C. flooded Italy with slaves, so that their numbers approached (and at times could have even exceeded) the numbers of free Italians. Slaves were employed in mines and as rowers of galleys, as domestic servants, and as agricultural laborers. At the same time that the small farm was disappearing, the slave plantation was taking over the peninsula and Sicily.

The distinction between slaves and freemen is perhaps the most extreme form of social inequality. Thus, widespread slavery must be a very corrosive influence on the society’s asabiya. In fact, empirical evidence shows slavery has a deep, and lasting, negative impact on “social capital.” (Social capital, as discussed in Chapter 13, is the equivalent of asabiya in modern societies.) For example, recently the political scientist Robert Putnam mapped the distribution of social capital among the American states. He found that the zone of high social capital is centered on the northern Midwest and extends east and west along the Canadian border. The zone of low social capital is centered over the Mississippi delta and extends outward in rising concentric circles through the former Confederacy. This north-south gradient in social capital has deep historical roots. Alexis de Tocqueville observed precisely the same pattern when he traveled in America in the 1830s: “As one goes farther south, one finds less active municipal life; the township has fewer officials, rights, and duties; the population does not exercise such a direct influence on affairs; the town meetings are less frequent and deal with fewer matters.”
