One way to make sense of this is to remember that religion often provides a symbolic marker that is used by people to distinguish “us” from “them.” A modern example of such a usage is the war in Yugoslavia between the Orthodox Serbs, the Catholic Croats, and the Muslim Bosnians—ethnically closely related peoples who, in fact, speak essentially the same language (Serbo-Croatian), yet are willing to commit genocide against each other. In the Byzantine Empire, the Aramaic-speaking Syrians, for example, and the Greek-speaking Anatolians both professed the same religion. However, they must have felt that they were distinct peoples, and did not want to “belong together.” It is doubtful that a Syrian boot maker in Antioch understood the fine points of distinction between the Chalcedonian and Monophysite creeds, but he knew very well that the Greeks were “them,” not “us,” and he wanted to emphasize the difference. Monophysite Christianity provided a source of identity distinct from the dominant imperial one. The struggle over the nature of Christ was an external manifestation of deep centrifugal tendencies tearing apart the social fabric of the empire. The geographic distribution of the sects confirms this conclusion. Monophysite and Chalcedonian bishoprics were not intermixed—the Balkans, Greece, and Anatolia were solidly Chalcedonian; Syria, Palestine, and Egypt were Monophysite. The separate state of Sassanian Persia was the stronghold of Nestorianism.

In the second half of the sixth century, the Byzantine Empire went into a secular disintegrative phase. Internal civil war coupled with repeated invasions by Persians, who at one point conquered all of the Levant and Egypt, removed the last restraint on the centrifugal forces forcing Chalcedonian and Monophysite areas apart. Even though Byzantium was able to regain Egypt and the Levant from Persia in 630, these territories stayed within the empire less than a decade. In 636, the Arabs defeated the Byzantine army at the battle of Yarmuk, and Syria fell to the caliphate. The next year, Jerusalem surrendered, and between 640 and 642 the Arabs conquered Egypt. Hundreds of thousands of committed Christians (mainly of Chalcedonian persuasion) immigrated to Byzantium rather than submit to Islam. The majority of the Monophysite population did not have any particular loyalty to the Byzantine Empire and acquiesced to the Muslim rule. The Byzantine loss of Egypt and the Levant was to be permanent.
