Another important indicator is the degree of economic inequality. Again, the 1960s is a breakpoint: Before that date, inequality was declining in the United States; after that date, it started increasing. In the decades right after World War II, a huge gap did not exist between the salaries of common workers and the compensation of CEOs. Adjusted for inflation, the incomes of the lowest 20 percent of workers have been stagnating and actually declining since 1970. The Matthew principle is in full operation.

Moreover, the official inflation rate, calculated by Bureau of Labor Statistics, does not tell the whole story. Many big-item purchases, most notably the prices of homes and the cost of education and health care, have been growing much faster than inflation.

The trends in education are particularly revealing because it is one of the best indicators of intra-elite competition. During the twentieth century, ever-increasing numbers of school graduates in America went to college. By the late twentieth century, just finishing college was not enough to enter the increasingly more competitive job market, and the number of college graduates earning Ph.D.s started increasing. The “price” of a Ph.D. in terms of years necessary for completion has been growing even faster. Between 1967 and 1995, the average length of time until finishing a Ph.D. increased in physical science from 6 to 8.4 years, and in social sciences from 7.7 to 10.5 years. In the humanities, the average time to a Ph.D. is 12 years, and in education 19.9 years!

These trends are signs of a credentialing crisis, which reflects increased intra-elite competition—more and more is required of adults to maintain familiar standards of comfort. Similar trends have been observed during pre-crisis phases of previous secular cycles. At the University of Paris, it took eight years to earn a Doctorate degree in the thirteenth century (five years to obtain a Bachelor degree, then three more to achieve the Doctorate). In the fourteenth century, it took 16 years to earn a Doctorate. The cost of education increased much faster than inflation in sixteenth-century France. Enrollments in Oxford and Cambridge peaked just before the Great Revolution, and then declined during the eighteenth century.
