Machiavelli’s ideas were completely at odds with the prevailing political ideology, and his contemporaries rejected them with horror. A much more conventional wisdom was uttered by the French king Louis IX ( 1226-70) before his death. When he fell ill, he said to his son and heir, “Fair son, I pray that you make yourself beloved of your people; for truly I would rather that a Scot should come from Scotland and govern the kingdom loyally and well than that you should govern it ill.” The people of his time clearly agreed with this sentiment, and Louis was canonized in 1297, but from the perspective of our cynical age, his words sound hopelessly naive as opposed to the harsh but seamlessly argued case put forward by Machiavelli. On the other hand, although St. Louis was no great shakes as a political thinker, he was a remarkably successful practical politician. Despite some notable setbacks, such as the disastrous crusade in Egypt (1248-50), during his long reign France became the hegemonic power of Europe, famous for the quality (and quantity) of its fighting men, the learning of its university, and the beauty of its Gothic cathedrals. The reign of St. Louis was the golden age of medieval France.

By contrast, Machiavelli was ultimately a failure as politician. He served as secretary to the Second Chancery of the Signoria, and was one of the most trusted associates of Pier Soderini, gonfalonier of the republic (the chief magistrate of Florence). Machiavelli’s public career spanned 14 years, during which time he represented the republic on several diplomatic missions. He played an important role in the successful subjugation of Pisa by the Florentines in 1509. However, in 1512, the Spanish troops attacked the fortified town of Prato, which guarded the northern approaches to Florence. After only a brief struggle the Florentine militia, recruited by Machiavelli, broke and ran away. Florence surrendered without further resistance, and the Spanish installed the new government headed by the Medici, who had been chased away from Florence 18 years earlier. Soderini was forced to resign and went into exile, and Machiavelli was dismissed from his post and banished. He withdrew to a small farm that his father left him, and there wrote the book that made him famous. The Prince (1513) was addressed to Lorenzo the Magnificent de Medici, and Machiavelli’s stated desire was to be reinstated in the government. His plea, however, remained unanswered, and he was forced to rusticate for the rest of his life.
