Another group that profited from the economic situation were certain bourgeois, particularly those who provided administrators and financiers for the state. But these individuals were a numerically small group, and their ennoblement could not reverse the overall trend of thinning the ranks of nobility. Thus, the old nobility shrank in numbers, but largely remained in control. This process can be illustrated with the situation in the Sologne (within the county of Blois). The Sologne contained nine fiefs possessing the right of high justice. Five of these fiefs remained within the hands of the old nobility without interruption. Of the remaining four, one was seized by the duke of Orléans for its debts, one was sold to another old noble family, and the last two were acquired by new nobility—the d’Étamps family, originating in the late fourteenth century. Thus, the total number of old nobility families shrank appreciably, but there was only one parvenu family to plug the resulting gap. Similar developments occurred at the opposite end of France, in the county of Bigorre, where there were 40 fiefs in 1313 but only 18 in 1429. Twelve fiefs disappeared as a result of depopulation and village abandonment. The other 10 fiefs were acquired by the surviving seigneurs. Thus, there were fewer lords in the county, but the surviving ones had, on average, more land than in 1300.

Economic difficulties, elevated mortality due to conflicts, and declining replacement rates had a measurable effect on the rate of noble family and lineage extinction. Although the county of Forez in south-central France escaped the worst excesses of the Hundred Years’ War, the rate of extinction of noble lineages in this region increased almost twofold from 31 percent during the thirteenth century to 54 percent and 55 percent in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, respectively.

We lack direct information about the overall numbers of nobles in medieval France, but scattered data indicate that in the early fourteenth century nobles constituted between 1.3 and 3.4 percent of the population, depending on province, for an average of 2.4 percent. One hundred fifty years later, the nobles were between 1 and 1.6 percent of the general population. In other words, because the total population halved over this period, the numbers of nobles declined by a factor of four. The declining tendency was particularly obvious with respect to the middle ranks—the knights—whose number decreased over the 150 years from 5,000-10,000 to just 1,000.
