Tolstoy found particularly objectionable the view, held by many nineteenth-century historians, that history is made by the great men. “The first 15 years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave their customary pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair, and for some years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive movement which first increases and then slackens. What was the cause of this movement, by what laws was it governed? asks the mind of man. The historians, replying to this question, lay before us the sayings and doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris, calling these sayings and doings ‘the Revolution’; then they give a detailed biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him; tell of the influence some of these people had on others, and say: That is why this movement took place and those are its laws. But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation, but plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger. The sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.”

Today the idea that history is moved solely by actions of great men is thoroughly discredited, but we continue to overestimate the influence of an individual on the course of history. Why else was there so much hope pinned on capturing Saddam Hussein by the occupying powers in Iraq? Yet the deaths of Saddam’s sons and his capture accomplished precisely what Tolstoy would have predicted—nothing.

We do not have to accept all ideas of Tolstoy—after all, he wrote War and Peace more than a century ago. But his argument that a science of history can be constructed only by integrating over the actions of myriads of individuals is, I think, valid. It is also accepted by modern sociologists. How we can deduce macro-social dynamics from the micro-actions of individuals is one of the central questions in sociology. The analogy with statistical physics, which deduced macro-properties, such as pressure and temperature, from micro-characteristics of molecules, is compelling.
