If Rome achieved such preeminence in central Italy at the end of the regal period (509 B.C.), why didn’t it continue to expand during the fifth century and unify the Mediterranean centuries before it actually happened? The answer has two parts. First, the Etruscan-Latin frontier does not qualify as a true metaethnic fault line. Both cultures were heavily influenced by the urban Mediterranean civilization, which was transmitted to them by the Greeks and the Phoenicians. The somewhat mild nature of the frontier could produce at best a regional state, not a world-class empire. It was only after the Romans found themselves on the second frontier, facing much more alien and terrifying “others” that they were forged into a truly imperial nation. Second, history usually does not develop linearly; there is also a strong cyclic component to it. What happened was that the long period of growth during the regal period created forces that now promoted decentralization tendencies in the Roman society. Part II examines such forces further; but during the fifth century, Rome experienced a disintegrative phase, a period of internal infighting that periodically threatened to become outright civil war, which brought the Roman state to the brink of destruction. Until such internal pressures subsided, Rome could not resume its expansion.

The time of troubles began with the revolt of a part of aristocracy against the last king of Rome, Tarquin the Proud. They were successful in deposing Tarquin and establishing an oligarchic form of government (somewhat misleadingly called the Republic) that would rule Rome for the next five centuries. Unfortunately, the process of social dissolution did not stop with Rome herself, but spread to Latium. The Latin cities subject to Rome’s control revolted and formed the Latin league to resist Rome’s power.

Back in Rome, unrest was growing between the commoners and the aristocrats. As a result of population growth during the sixth century, land became scarce and many people were impoverished. To feed their families, they borrowed heavily from the wealthy. Roman laws were very harsh to insolvent debtors. Creditors could enslave a debtor who could not pay what he owed. Scarcity of land and oppression by wealthy creditors resulted in a loss of support among the commoners for the policies of the ruling class. The struggle between patricians and plebs never resulted in outright revolution because Rome was surrounded by enemies on all sides, and this precarious situation ensured a critical level of cooperation. Nevertheless, the plebs periodically “seceded”—that is, they withdrew from the city to the Aventine Hill, at the time outside the city boundary. These secessions were a kind of blackmail of the upper classes; by denying recruits to the army, the plebs were attempting to force the aristocrats to address issues of concern, reduction of debt and land redistribution.
