Other important Roman virtues included piety, faith, gravity, and constancy. Piety (pietas) was a family virtue—devotion and loyalty by men and women to the family group, willing acceptance of parental authority. It also meant reverence to the gods, expressed through performance of required religious rites and ceremonies, such as the sacrifice of a ram to Janus, or a heifer to Jupiter. Even the infamous gladiatorial fights evolved from an ancient religious ritual involving sacrifice of prisoners to the dead.

Faith (fides) meant keeping one’s word, paying one’s debts, and fulfilling obligations toward people and gods. Violation of fides was an offense against both community and gods. Gravity (gravitas) meant discipline, absolute self-control—a dignified, serious, and calm attitude toward both good and bad fortune. Constancy (constantia) was a related virtue of perseverance, doing what was necessary and right, even under the most trying circumstances. Romans greatly prided themselves on moderation, the avoidance of all kinds of extremes and excesses, and remarked on any instances of immoderate behavior in themselves and in other peoples with disapproval. For example, recollect the characterization by Livy of the Gauls above as susceptible to “the uncontrollable anger which is so characteristic of their race.” No true Roman would behave in such a way. This contrast between the Roman gravitas and barbarian immoderation, at least as perceived by the Romans themselves, is well illustrated on one episode from the Gallic wars. The story, most likely, is a complete invention, but the point is not whether it actually happened, but how the Romans perceived themselves in opposition to the “other.” During one of the encounters between the Roman and Gallic forces, “a Gaul of enormous size” challenged the Romans to a single combat. When the challenge was taken up by Titus Manlius (a member of a patrician family), the Gaul “was fatuously delighted and even stuck out his tongue in derision.” The two combatants met between the armies. “One was remarkable for his stature, resplendent in multicolored clothing and painted armor inlaid with gold; the other had a moderate physique for a soldier and was nothing special to look at, with armor that was suitable rather than ornate. He did not sing out war cries, or dance about with useless brandishings of weapons, but his breast swelled with courage and silent anger; all his ferocity was held back for the critical moment of the duel....” Needless to say, Roman determination wins over Gallic brute strength.
