The disintegrative phase of the republican cycle, thus, is almost a textbook example of the fathers-and-sons type of dynamics. The first two decades, 140 to 120 (all dates B.C.) were a time of contention, the next three decades relatively peaceful. The period 90 to 70 was another civil war, the succeeding two decades, 70 to 50, peaceful. The last period of civil war was 50 to 30, following which the disintegrative phase ended to the general relief of all those who were still alive.

THE DISINTEGRATIVE PHASE OF THE late Roman Republic ended for the same reason that it did in the French and English cases—the long period of internal instability “solved” the elite overproduction problem. The extent of carnage during the civil wars of the first century B.C. was truly awesome. In just one decade, 91 to 82 B.C., as many as 200,000 men lost their lives. The Spartacus rebellion accounted for another 100,000. Yet another 100,000 men were killed between 49 and 42 B.C. As one wit said, a hundred thousand here, a hundred thousand there, and soon we are talking about really big numbers.

Most of the casualties in the civil wars were commoners—landless citizens, noncitizen Italians, noncombatants caught in the fighting. But even if only 1 percent of these casualties came from the aristocracy, it would represent a significant drain on their numbers. At least as important was the mortality during the street rioting—it is reported that 3,000 supporters of Gaius Gracchus died when he was murdered. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, every time a winning faction gained control of the state, it enthusiastically slaughtered its opponents. The most famous (or infamous) were the proscriptions under Sulla. His victims included 15 men of consular rank, 90 senators, and 2,600 knights. (The Roman knights—equestrians—were the middle rank aristocrats, just below the senators in status and wealth.) Because the senate membership before Sulla was 300, he managed to obliterate a cool third of the Roman magnates. And the proscriptions of Sulla were just a single episode in the bloody struggles of the first century B.C. Before Sulla, there was “the reign of terror” by Marius and his partisans. The later proscriptions, following Caesar’s death in 44 B.C., resulted in the executions of 300 senators and 2,000 knights. Caesar had increased senate membership to 900 (thus satisfying the pent-up demand for upward mobility), so this round of proscriptions carried away yet another third of Rome’s top aristocracy.
