One kind of experiment, which has now been conducted by a number of investigative teams, is called “the public goods game.” Subjects are divided up in groups of four and given an initial endowment of $10 each. The game is played in 10 rounds. Every round each participant can contribute any part, from 0 to 10 dollars, to the group project. The experimenters first double the total amount contributed to the common account, and then divide it up equally among all participants. Thus, for each dollar contributed to the common pot, a participant gains back only 50 cents. On the other hand, he or she also gains 50 cents for each dollar contributed by others. If all participants contribute the maximum amount ($10), they would end up with $20 each, doubling their initial endowment.

Clearly a rational, self-interested player will contribute nothing to the common pot, keeping the initial stake plus whatever gains come from the cooperative behavior of the others. In the best case, when the other three all contribute the maximum, the “free-rider” would get $15 in addition to the initial stake, for a total of $25. However, others will make the same calculation and also contribute nothing, so everybody is left with $10, instead of the maximum cooperative payoff of $20. Thus, the rational choice theory predicts that there will be no cooperation.

Real people did not behave in the way predicted by the self-interest hypothesis. The average contribution to the common pot in the early rounds was about half the endowment. In other words, people started halfway between the fully cooperative and fully self-interested positions. In subsequent rounds, however, cooperation gradually unraveled, and on the last round three quarters did not contribute anything at all, while most of the rest contributed just a dollar or two. Did this happen because the participants were stupid, so that it took many rounds for them to figure out the rational strategy? No, because in the post-experiment interviews many subjects told the researchers that they grew increasingly angry at those who did not contribute and punished them the only way they could—by curtailing their contributions to the common pot.
