About the same time, the nobles again demonstrated that a peasant uprising has no chance against a prepared and organized nobility. The turning point was the battle between thousands of peasant insurgents (9,000 according to the chronicler) and a company of 40 lances (120 men at arms) led by the Captal de Buch and Gaston of Foix in the town of Meaux. “The count of Foix and the Captal de Buch and their men, who were ready armed, formed up in the marketplace and then moved to the gates of the market and flung them open. There they faced the villeins, small and dark and very poorly armed.... When those evil men saw them [the knights] drawn up in this warlike order—although their numbers were comparatively small—they became less resolute than before. The foremost began to fall back and the noblemen to come after them, striking at them with their lances and swords and beating them down. Those who felt the blows, or feared to feel them, turned back in such panic that they fell over each other. Then men at arms of every kind burst out of the gates and ran into the square to attack those evil men. They mowed them down in heaps and slaughtered them like cattle; and they drove all the rest out of the town, for none of the villeins attempted to take up any sort of fighting order. They went on killing them until they were stiff and weary and they flung many into the River Marne. In all, they exterminated more than seven thousand Jacks on that day.... After that route at Meaux, there were no assemblies of the Jacks, for the young Lord de Coucy placed himself at the head of a large company of knights and squires who wiped them out wherever they found them, without pity or mercy.” By the end of August 1358, the Jacquerie was over.

The next year, the English again invaded the French heartland. Edward III’s aim was Reims, where he planned to crown himself the king of France. (Reims was where French coronations were traditionally held.) The dauphin wisely avoided battle and practiced a scorched-earth policy, thereby preventing the English from sustaining their siege of Reims. Edward then attempted to take Paris, but again was frustrated. His troops exhausted and treasury depleted, Edward negotiated a peace treaty at Brétigny (1360). In return for Edward’s renouncing his claim to the French throne, Charles yielded large amounts of territory in the southwest and north, and promised to pay an enormous ransom—three million livres—for his father.
