What makes cultural transmission really distinct from genetic inheritance is that people can learn from other people, not only from their parents. Young people adopt certain behaviors by imitating a particularly successful or charismatic individual in their tribe. They are also taught many things by the tribal elders, from catching fish to telling the truth. The point is that behavioral practices can spread rapidly within a group by this process of cultural transmission, much more rapidly than if the transmission process were determined solely by genes. Of course, any kinds of behaviors can spread by imitation and teaching, both beneficial and harmful for the group. That is why the competition between groups is so important—it weeds out groups that have fixated on harmful practices. For example, take the ritual consumption of the brains of deceased relatives among the Fore people of New Guinea. This turned out to be a bad practice because it allowed the transmission of a neurodegenerative disease known as Kuru. Had Shirley Lindenbaum and Daniel Gajdusek not discovered the cause of the disease, the Fore would have eventually succumbed and been replaced by other tribes that did not eat dead relatives.

Humans have large brains and highly developed cognitive abilities. Apparently, people can keep in their minds information about the history of dealings within a group of more than a hundred people, remembering those who keep their word versus the cheaters. Furthermore, evolutionary psychologists Leda Cosmides and John Tooby argue that there are specialized “cheater-detection circuits” that allow a potential cooperator to detect individuals who free-ride. In short, people are very smart when it comes to social interactions. This unique ability of humans enables us to become very efficient moralists. Remember that a moralist not only behaves according to the norms, but also detects and punishes cheaters—people who break such social rules. A “second-order” moralist also keeps track of those who shirk by not punishing cheaters, and punishes them (“Damn John Jay! Damn everyone who won’t damn John Jay!!”).
