Perceptions of historical processes are often affected by our cultural and ideological biases, and Russian history is one illustration of this. Much of what we know about early modern Russia came to us transmitted through the eyes of western Europeans, such as the envoy from the Austrian Empire, Sigismund von Herberstein, mentioned previously. These individuals were not trained anthropologists, and when we read their descriptions we must consider their various cultural preconceptions. For example, western European visitors made disapproving comments about the weird habit of the Russians to wash every week, on Sunday, even in winter. (Everybody knows that bathing is bad for your health!) Westerners also complained that Russians were not gentlemen. When insulted, instead of challenging to a duel, they sue in court! (This, unfortunately changed with time, and the dueling epidemic of the nineteenth century was to claim thousands of Russian noblemen’s lives, among them two of the language’s best poets, Pushkin and Lermontov.)

Russian history continued to suffer from observer biases even during the twentieth century. During the Cold War era, American writers often invoked the inherent predisposition of the Russians to autocratic rule to explain Stalin-era totalitarianism. Surprisingly, the Soviet historians concurred, although for a diametrically opposed reason. They contrasted the tsarist oppression with the workers paradise constructed by the Communists after the revolution. Only since the mid-1980s, and especially after 1990 and the end of the Cold War, have the archives become freely accessible to both Russian and Western historians, such that we have started to witness a new and much more impartial scholarship. In the “Notes and Further Readings” at the end of the book, I list several of these works.

Peasants were certainly oppressed in Russia, as in any other premodern state, including western European countries. However, the degree of oppression of the lower classes varied in space and with time. I have already pointed out that the frontier society was much more egalitarian than the central regions of Russia. In the central regions, however, the overall quality of the relations between lords and peasants changed quite dramatically from the fifteenth to the eighteenth century.
