Is Tolstoy correct in pushing his logic to this extreme? This is a question into which we can actually sink our scientific teeth. During the Napoleonic wars, the French army fought scores of battles, some under the leadership of Napoleon, others led by his generals. Using the methods developed by military historians, which I discuss shortly, it is possible to do a statistical analysis of the battle outcomes. Taking into account various factors, such as the numbers of men on each side, the armaments, position, and tactical surprise (if any), the analysis shows that Napoleon as commander acted as a multiplier, estimated as 1.3. In other words, the presence of Napoleon was equivalent to the French having an extra 30 percent of troops. This is strong evidence that the extreme position advocated by Tolstoy cannot be right. Of course, we still do not know whether Napoleon’s dispositions before the engagement or directions during the battle were instrumental in increasing the chance of the French victory. It is also possible that the “Napoleon effect” was entirely due to his mystique or charisma, which elevated the courage and determination of soldiers. Most likely, all of these factors were operating together, and we cannot distinguish between them with data. We do know, however, that the presence of Napoleon had a measurable effect on the outcome. Here we have one clear-cut example of the importance of an individual in history.

The problem, however, is that it does not help us in building a better theory. Napoleons, Alexanders, Caesars, and so on probably influenced the course of history during their lifetimes. It does not mean that they could do whatever they wanted—Caesar did not manage to end the disintegrative phase of the republican cycle; he did not even manage to survive to an old age. But it is likely that without him the Gaul would be conquered a generation later, and this is a substantial perturbation of the Roman trajectory. But where did Caesar come from? What kind of theory could tell us when to expect an appearance of a hero, and when not? I do not know of such a theory. Until we have it, the knowledge that extraordinary people appear once in a while and that they influence the course of events is useless to us. It cannot be meaningfully fitted within the theoretical framework.

Think about it from a different angle. Suppose all I proposed in this book would be to say that different nations have different asabiya and therefore that is why some rise and others decline. Would that qualify as a scientific theory? Not at all, because asabiya would be just a different name for the fact that some empires grow and others fall. Just coining a term does not explain anything. If I can tell you why asabiya grows and why it declines, however, we have the beginnings of a theory. We can then work on turning such beginnings into a mature scientific theory by testing the theory’s predictions with empirical data.
