Northern Italians have been much more successful in cooperating in business ventures. But here is a very interesting observation. Italian economic success came entirely from small and medium-sized companies, typically family owned and operated. Italy has not a single publicly held international corporation on the model of General Electric or Mitsubishi. The largest Italian company, Fiat, is still family owned. The typical successful Italian company is a family-owned business with perhaps a hundred employees in Milan or Bologna. They occupy a variety of niches from fashion to high-precision machinery, and they are extremely successful at what they do. But they cannot break into certain international markets because they lack the advantage of size. And they cannot grow to a large size, because the Italians, even northern ones, can cooperate only in medium-sized groups. Is this why northern Italians historically could not get beyond medium-sized states?

WHEN TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE amoral familism of the Italian south, Edward Banfield drew an explicit contrast with the vibrant civic culture of a small Midwestern American town in the 1950s, a social group with which he was intimately familiar. Banfield’s observations echo in a remarkable way those of Alexis de Tocqueville. We have already had a chance to consult Tocqueville’s study of the civic life in America. But Tocqueville also traveled in Naples and Sicily as a young man, before he went to America, and in the long essay he wrote describing the trip he remarked on the culture of distrust and duplicity that pervaded the southern Italian society. It is remarkable how stable this particular manifestation of asabiya (or, rather, lack of it) has been in that region.

Two hundred years ago, both America and the Mezzogiorno were pretty much in the same position with respect to each other as they are today—the first flowing with an abundance of asabiya or social capital in the form of a myriad functioning national and local institutions, the other suffering from an almost complete lack of such networking. Both places industrialized and modernized in the intervening two centuries. The economic and social changes have been enormous. Yet, at a certain basic level, that of social cohesion and capacity for collective action, neither society changed that much. This is not to say that the asabiya of a society is set in stone; just that it changes very slowly, on the time scale of centuries.

The roots of the Italian north-south divide must go back a long time. Robert Putnam sees it going back to the eleventh century, when a centralized Norman kingdom was established in southern Italy and when independent communes began organizing themselves in the north. In the north, the more democratic governments of the city communes in Florence, Venice, Bologna, and Milan nurtured civic spirit. In the south, according to Putnam, a succession of authoritarian governments stifled social capital.
