The frugal lifestyle of the senatorial aristocracy in early Rome also did not distinguish them greatly from the common citizens. Overseas trade during the early Republic was at a low ebb, so hardly any oriental luxuries were imported to serve as goods for conspicuous consumption. The only difference in clothing that distinguished senators from the rest of citizens was the broad purple stripe on their toga. Roman historians of the later age stressed the modest way of life, even poverty of the leading citizens. For example, when Cincinnatus was summoned to be dictator, while working at the plow, he reportedly exclaimed: “My land will not be sown this year, and so we shall run the risk of not having enough to eat!” This is not to deny that the Roman society was acutely aware of rank and status. A noble patrician such as a member of the Claudii clan, many of whose ancestors served as consuls, had more wealth, power, and auctoritas—prestige and respect—compared to a common citizen. The Roman Republic was no democracy, and the few senatorial families gathered in their hands the bulk of political power. Nevertheless, no huge precipice existed between the wealthy and powerful few on one hand, and the dispossessed masses on the other, which was to develop during the later Republic and, especially, during the golden age of the Roman Empire.

Vertical integration—lack of glaring barriers between the aristocracy and the commons—seems to be a general characteristic of successful imperial nations during their early phase. To cite another example from antiquity, the lifestyle of the royal family of Macedon before the Persian conquests was also very modest. The mothers and sisters of the kings cooked the food and wove the cloth. When Alexander was conquering the Persian Empire, he wore homespun clothes made by his sisters. During the campaigns, Alexander ate the same food and slept under the same conditions as his soldiers.

Unlike the selfish elites of the later periods, the aristocracy of the early Republic did not spare its blood or treasure in the service of the common interest. When 50,000 Romans, a staggering one fifth of Rome’s total manpower, perished in the battle of Cannae, as mentioned previously, the senate lost almost one third of its membership. This suggests that the senatorial aristocracy was more likely to be killed in wars than the average citizen. Add this to the peculiarly Roman practice of “devotion,” which was always performed by a member of noble lineage, and it is easy to conclude that generally Roman aristocrats led the commoners in battle, and were the first to die.
