“Now that the Romans had gone and there was no external threat, national custom and rivalry had turned the Germans against one another. The two nations [the Cherusci with allies led by Arminius and the Suebi led by Maroboduus] were well matched in strength, and their leaders equally capable. But the Suebi did not like the royal title of their leader Maroboduus, whereas Arminius was popular as champion of freedom. So in addition to his old soldiers—the Cherusci and their allies—two Suebian tribes from the kingdom of Maroboduus also entered the war on Arminius’s side [these were the Semnones and Langobards]. These additions looked like turning the scale. However, Inguiomerus and a group of his followers deserted to the Suebi, merely because the old man was too proud to serve under his young nephew.

“Each army had high hopes as it drew up for battle. The old German unsystematic battle-order and chaotic charges were things of the past. Their long wars against Rome taught them to follow the standards, keep troops in reserve, and obey commands.” Tacitus then describes the speeches that Arminius and Maroboduus gave to inspire their troops for the fight.

“Besides these speeches, the armies had motives of their own to excite them. The Cherusci had the glorious past to fight for, and their new allies [the Langobards] their freshly acquired freedom from the Suebi. Their enemy’s aim was expansion. Never had a result been so unpredictable. Both right wings were routed. However, instead of renewing the battle, as was expected, Maroboduus transferred his camp to the hills. This showed that he was beaten. Then, weakened by a series of desertions, he retreated....”

A year or two later, Maroboduus, deserted by all, crossed the Danube and requested asylum from his old enemies. The Romans kept him in Ravenna, “and whenever the Suebi became disorderly they were threatened with his restoration. But for 18 years he never left Italy, growing old, his reputation dimmed by excessive fondness for life.”

Arminius’s triumph was short-lived. “The Roman evacuation of Germany and the fall of Maroboduus had induced Arminius to aim at kingship. But his freedom-loving compatriots forcibly resisted. The fortunes of the fight fluctuated, but finally Arminius succumbed to treachery from his own relations.”

These passages from Tacitus are extremely telling (not to mention the poetry of “his reputation dimmed by excessive fondness for life”). As long as a powerful external force threatened the Germans, the tribes were capable of uniting and inflicting defeats on it. When the immediate threat went, however, so did the unity. Individual tribes (such as the Langobards) or even parts of tribes (such as Inguiomerus and his Cherusci followers) shifted from one leader to another. Individual tribesmen were wary of enormous power gathered by the leader, and when war was over, desired to limit this power or even to get rid of the leader himself.
