The Matthew principle operates not only on wealth distribution among the merchants, it is also a general mechanism by which all kinds of inequality can arise. In fact, the name for this principle was coined by the sociologist Robert K. Merton in the context of “accumulation” of peer recognition by scientists, as measured for example, by who gets cited. All this is very interesting, but how does it relate to premodern agrarian societies, which is the main subject of interest to us? The main form of wealth in agrarian societies is land, because one needs land to grow crops and raise livestock, the chief products in agrarian economy. How does inequality of land ownership develop?

A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO I decided to answer this question. I wanted to gain a very detailed, intimate understanding of this process. This meant that I needed an explicit mathematical model.

Models are simplified descriptions of reality that strip away all of its complexity except for a few features thought to be critical to the understanding of the phenomenon under study. Mathematical models are such descriptions translated into a very precise language that, unlike natural human languages, does not allow for any double (or triple) meanings. The great strength of mathematics is that, after we have framed a problem in mathematical language, we can deduce precisely what are the consequences of the assumptions we made—no more, no less. Mathematics, thus, is an indispensable tool in true science; a branch of science can lay a claim to theoretical maturity only after it has developed a body of mathematical theory, which typically consists of an interrelated set of specific, narrowly focused models.

Although mathematics is indispensable in developing theory, it does not mean that here I have to inflict the equations on the reader to explain what the theory tells us. The Princeton economist Paul Krugman once wrote, “The equations and diagrams of formal economics are, more often than not, no more than the scaffolding used to help construct an intellectual edifice. Once that edifice has been built to a certain point, the scaffolding can be stripped away, leaving only plain English behind.” Here is the story in plain English.
