PEOPLE IN THE MIDDLE AGES knew very well that power, riches, and glory were impermanent. A common visual expression of this idea, found in Gothic cathedrals and illustrated manuscripts, was the “Wheel of Fortune.” A typical representation showed a goddess of Fortune standing by a large wheel. At the top a man is seated, his head crowned and a scepter in hand. Little does he know that his moment of power and glory is transient. When Fortune turns the wheel, the king descends and his crown falls off. By the time he reaches the bottom, he is dressed in rags. But then Fortune gives the wheel another crank, and he who was at the bottom is carried high to glory again.

Looking at the history of France and other Western European countries from a bird’s eye view, the Wheel of Fortune is clear. Periods of national prosperity and strong states alternate with periods of economic decline and social disintegration in a cyclical fashion. The High Middle Ages were followed by the calamitous fourteenth century. But then Europe experienced the Renaissance, a period of prosperity and cultural brilliance in many ways similar to the High Middle Ages. The Renaissance was followed by the “crisis of the seventeenth century,” but again, the times of trouble were eventually over. The last complete cycle began with the Age of Enlightenment and ended with the Age of Revolution (1789-1849). There is a peculiar rhythm of history, forcing societies to alternate between secular (century-long) periods of prosperity and crisis. And such secular cycles were not peculiar to the European history—we find them in all agrarian empires about which we know enough to quantify their economic, social, and political changes.

The Wheel of Fortune is simply an allegory for any cyclical process of rise and fall. One problem with this metaphor, however, is that it offers a too mechanical view of history—that rise and fall are somehow imposed by an external force. It is natural for us to think in terms of simple cause-effect explanations of this kind. Thus, the most popular explanation of why the fourteenth century was the time of decline and disintegration in Europe invokes climatic change. During the medieval times, the explanation goes, climate was warm and harvests abundant. In the fourteenth century, however, temperatures fell, crops suffered, and complex societies could not sustain themselves any longer and went into collapse. However, this explanation cannot be right. During the past few years, climatologists made great strides in refining their estimates of how temperatures fluctuated over the last two millennia. With these better data, we now see that there is no correlation between spells of cold weather and times of trouble. Cooling climate sometimes coincides with crisis periods, but most often not. Climatic change, thus, cannot be the real reason for the secular cycles, although it can contribute to trouble—causing crop failures or aiding the spread of disease.
