It took only a century or so for the north French to begin organizing effective resistance in the face of Norman pressure. This was an unusually rapid response—generally speaking, around two or three centuries under frontier conditions need to pass before new aggressive nations arise. But the people of North France descended from the Roman frontiersmen and Frankish colonists. Finding themselves on the periphery of the Frankish Empire, they were not subjected to asabiya-corrupting influences that always affect core regions. Thus, already by the middle of the tenth century, we see the first clear signs of political consolidation around the counts of Paris, Anjou, and Blois—and the dukes of Normandy.

After all, when the alien population from Scandinavia settled down within Normandy, surrounded by hostile neighbors on all sides, they came under the same kind of pressure that they exerted on their neighbors. The Viking raiders had very high asabiya, but its social scale was small—they cooperated within small kin-based groups. This was enough for raiding. A Norman war band, faced by an overwhelming army, could get on their ships and row themselves to safety. After the Normans acquired land, however, they had to learn to cooperate on a larger scale to defend it. In her important book on Norman “predatory kinship,” Eleanor Searle traced the process by which the Norman community formed out of disparate bands of Nordic raiders and settlers. “By the mid-eleventh century,” she writes, “the descendants of the settlers formed the most disciplined, cooperative warrior society in Europe, capable of a communal effort—the conquest and subjugation of England—that was not, and could not have been, mounted by any other European political entity.” Searle argues that the tenth century Normans creatively used their notion of kinship to cross-link the whole warrior society in Normandy. Perhaps the most striking example of such a “predatory kinship” group is the Norman conquest of southern Italy and Sicily. It was led by, literally, a band of brothers—the 10 sons of Tancred of Hauteville. The army of William the Conqueror, which invaded England in 1066, was a band of brothers in a less literal sense. It was a band of kinsmen—brothers, first and second cousins, brothers-in-law and sons-in-law, and so on. Kinship links crisscrossed the leadership of William’s host and held it together as one cohesive whole.

The specific mechanism for Norman solidarity that Searle proposes, therefore, is particular to the time and place and to the cultural peculiarities of the Normans (for example, their Germanic notions of kinship). More generally, however, the Normans had high asabiya because they coalesced as a nation on a metaethnic frontier. In general, although group solidarity always increases under frontier conditions, the specific means of achieving cohesion depend on the culture and situation.
