At the top of the power hierarchy of France stood the great territorial magnates—lay lords (the king, dukes, counts, and barons) and prelates (abbots, bishops, and archbishops). Below them were a multitude of nobles, from the more substantial knights to relatively poor country squires. There were between 60,000 and 100,000 noble households in France, or just under 2 percent of the total population. The differences in wealth within the second estate (that is, the nobility; the first estate were the clergy, and the third estate the commoners) were enormous. Consider the county of Forez in south-central France in the late thirteenth century. At the top of the local hierarchy stood the count of Forez with 12,000 livres of annual income. Below him were two or three barons with incomes of between 1,000 and 2,000 livres per year. Twenty or so substantial knights, each with a castle, enjoyed incomes between 100 and 500 livres. The holders of fortified houses were worse off, with incomes of 50 to 100 livres per year. At the bottom of the noble hierarchy were about 100 lesser gentry whose income varied between 25 and 50 livres per year. To put this income in perspective, the basic minimum on which a single person could live in modest comfort at the time was 5 livres (this was, the typical allowance provided to a young nobleman attending university, or a pension to a widow of the lesser gentry). In other words, 25 livres per year was enough to maintain a family of four or five, but left no surplus for status seeking.

Below the lesser gentry was a stratum of free peasants who owned the land that they worked. Finally, the great majority of the population did not own any land beyond, at best, a cottage with an attached vegetable garden. Some of these people were serfs, who worked fields owned by a feudal lord; others rented land, or hired out as agricultural laborers. In the late thirteenth century, a large and growing number were indigent, vagabonds, or criminals. The distribution of wealth in towns was similarly unequal, with a few great merchants on top and the impoverished majority at the bottom.

Medieval England had similar social structure. At the top were around 200 great barons whose incomes were measured in hundreds or thousands of pounds. Below them were the middle ranks of 3,000 knights and esquires earning between £20 and £100. (The English pound was equivalent to 5 livres, and so this group corresponded to the French knights with 100 to 500 livres.) The lesser gentry with £5 to £20 pounds per year (equivalent to 25 to 100 livres) numbered perhaps 10,000 households. Below the gentry was a group of free peasant landowners—yeomen. A laborer at that time earned on the order of £lto £2 per year (assuming he could get full employment).
