By no stretch of imagination could England of 1200 be called an egalitarian society. Medieval people were quite aware of great disparities in wealth and power, and accepted it as ordained by God. The commons and the lords found some kind of accommodation, a form of social equilibrium. However, in the early fourteenth century, the disparity between the rich and the poor reached alarming proportions, putting the social consensus under strain. And the distribution of wealth was becoming very uneven, not only among the English as a whole, but also within each social class. Thus, the Atwoods were sinking into poverty at the same time that the Harcombs were waxing in wealth. Within the nobility, at the same time that the earls of Lancaster were growing increasingly wealthy and powerful, the great majority of the country gentry struggled to retain the standard of living they had become accustomed to. The growing within-class inequalities undermined the foundations of the social order. Landless peasants saw other peasants, who were intrinsically no better than them, grow rich and “put on airs.” Impoverished gentry, who now could not afford their bottle of French claret with dinner and were forced to drink beer like commoners, saw others of their class rolling in the lap of luxury. This was patently unfair. Even worse, some of their peasant neighbors were avid to better their social standing. The friction between upwardly mobile commoners and backsliding gentry was generating heat and sparks, and later contributed to the lengthy and bitter civil wars. The growth of inequality undermined social solidarity.

ALL IN ALL, THE MODEL DID NOT do too poorly. As always, there is no perfect mapping of the virtual reality in the model to the “real” reality. However, the two main processes that it identified as the engine of growing inequality appear to have counterparts in the data, at least as far as medieval England is concerned. But there is one problem. In the model, inequality always grows with time. Is this reasonable?

If the Matthew principle operated all the time, over the past 10,000 years or so that humans have had property, status inequality, and complex societies, we should have converged to the “inequality extreme,” in which one individual held all the property, and everybody else was destitute. Such an outcome is possible in the model (when inheritance is modeled according to the primogeniture rule), but obviously it did not happen in the real world. Moreover, looking at the historical record, we observe not only periods when inequality increased (as in thirteenth-century England), but also periods when it decreased. In the United States, for example, during the twentieth century economic inequality decreased from a peak of the “roaring twenties” to a trough in the sixties. Since the 1960s, however, wealth disparity has been increasing again, making great strides during the “greed decade” of the 1980s.
