In 1359, the dauphin called for a meeting of the estates of the whole kingdom. This time the elites were able to bury their differences. After lengthy consultations, they hammered out a permanent solution for financing the state. The ordinance of December 5, 1360 became a landmark in French fiscal history by establishing the basic tax framework of the kingdom that was to last until the French Revolution. It imposed two kinds of taxes: the hearth tax and sales taxes, including an important tax on salt consumption, called the gabelle. This system of taxation represented a compromise between the landed and urban elites. The main burden of the hearth tax was on rural lordships, whereas sales taxes primarily affected the urban population. The salt gabelle was a highly regressive tax, the main burden on which had to be borne by the poor (who, as usual, got shafted because they were not represented in the Estates General).

There was very little opposition to the new taxes. The evident need to ransom the king was clearly one factor, although in the end the whole amount of ransom was never paid; instead, the government of the dauphin Charles wisely used the money to build a new army. Perhaps even more important was the collective realization that something had to be done or France was lost. Another contributing factor was the massive “pruning” of the French nobility administered by the war. The worst disaster, that of Crécy, wiped out 10,000 of the “flower of the French nobility” and Poitiers accounted for another 2,500. Thousands died at the naval battle of Sluys (1340), in the local civil wars such as that raging in Brittany, and at the hands of the Jacks and routiers. In short, by 1360 there were fewer “noble thugs” to cause trouble—some were killed off, others inherited property of their slain relatives, and the rest were simply fed up with perpetual violence and chaos. The swing in the public opinion in favor of peace and stability was evident in the new tone of literature on warfare and chivalry. Whereas the emphasis before the collapse of 1358 was on the right to private war and the pursuit of honor and glory, now it addressed questions of discipline and public order. In a motet (a polyphonic choral composition sung in Latin), Philippe Royllart praised Charles’s victories over the English: “Thou hast vanquished the enemy that plagued our innocent people,” but then added, “now bring the peace to us. Listen to us and make it happen.” This new social consensus, however, was still quite fragile and, as we shall see shortly, France was to experience a relapse into chaos during the early fifteenth century, but for now the nobility had circled its wagons around the government led by Charles.
