The main problem with the initial, crude version of the group-selection theory is this. Think about two types, altruistic “saints” and self-interested “knaves.” It is true that groups that have many saints will be doing better than groups with lots of knaves. However, in addition to this between-group competition, there is a within-group competition between saints and knaves, which saints inevitably lose. This is the collective-action problem, all over again. The benefits from prosocial actions of the saints are spread evenly among all group members, including the knaves, but the costs are born entirely by the saints. As a result, the saints will suffer higher mortality and lower reproduction rate compared to the knaves. Overall, numbers of saints will change as the result of two opposing tendencies: between-group competition that causes saint numbers to increase, and within-group competition that causes their numbers to decline. It is hard to say which process will prevail without doing calculations. Unfortunately for the group-selection theory, mathematical models show that, except under quite unusual circumstances, the individual (within group) selection will almost always overwhelm group selection.

By the 1970s, this mathematical result was widely known, and it became fashionable to make fun at the expense of the “naive” proponents of group selection. The said proponents crawled into various holes with their tails between the legs (with a few exceptions, most notably David Sloan Wilson at Binghamton University, who continued to plug on in almost total isolation). The “individual-selectionist” view became the dogma in the field of evolutionary biology as seen in, for example, Richard Dawkins’s book The Selfish Gene.
