Although the French hosts were completely ineffective against the English, and lost one battle after another, they nevertheless had to be paid. But the declining royal revenues were increasingly inadequate to cover the spiraling costs of war. Remembering the baronial revolts of 1314-1316, during the 1340s and 1350s the Crown sought the help of the ruling elites (urban patricians and rural nobility) in collecting additional taxes. The disaster of Crécy and the loss of Calais the next year brought home to the nobility the seriousness of the situation, and the Estates General endorsed the royal plan for raising revenues at the end of 1347. The arrival of the Black Death the next year, however, disrupted tax collection, and no significant revenue materialized. Large-scale hostilities resumed in 1355, when Edward III landed in Calais and marched his army into Artois and Picardy. John II the Good chose not to seek battle, but to burn or carry off anything the countryside might offer an invading army. This scorched-earth policy succeeded in driving the English back to the Channel, but at the cost of leaving the local populace to starve. In December 1355, the Estates General met in Paris and authorized taxation for prosecuting war, but the attempts to collect the taxes ran into the resistance of local assemblies. The Estates met again in 1356 and through 1357, but their focus shifted from securing means of fighting the war to a more political agenda.

On September 19, 1356, the French army met near Poitiers the English army led by the Black Prince. The outcome was another disaster for the French. John the Good, 18 counts and viscounts, 21 barons and bannerets, and 2,000 knights and squires were captured. The debacle triggered the collapse of the state that manifested itself as urban revolution, aristocratic rebellion, and peasant uprising, all at once.

The government led by the dauphin (future Charles V) was confronted with two related problems. First, it had to come up with a huge ransom of 3 million livres for John II even though the state was bankrupt, and could not even pay the army. The government had no recourse but to convene the Estates General to make its appeal for money directly to the representatives of the elites. The second problem, however, was that the string of defeats, despite heavy taxation, had completely destroyed the credibility of the government. Additionally, the nobility itself was suffering from collapsing revenues and the need to raise money for their own ransoms. Here is how the contemporary chronicler Jean Froissart describes the mood of the country.
