THE FIRST SIGNS OF THE LATE republican crisis were the slave revolts, which began breaking out all over the Roman world in 138 B.C.—in Italy (where it was suppressed with the crucifixion of over 4,500 slaves at Rome and surrounding towns), at the great slave market of Delos, and at the silver mines of Laurium (near Athens). The worst one was the revolt of 70,000 slaves in Sicily (135-132 B.C.). This so-called First Servile War was followed by the Second (104-101), also in Sicily, and then the Third (73-71), led by Spartacus.

Peasant rebellions rarely succeed in agrarian societies when the elites maintain their unity, and slave revolts in late republican Rome were not an exception to this rule. A much more dangerous threat to the state arises when the elites become splintered, and certain factions begin to mobilize popular support to be used in their quest for power. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus (163-132 B.C.) was a politically ambitious young noble from a very prominent family. His father achieved the pinnacle of political success, having served as consul (twice) and censor. But the nobles of the Tiberius Gracchus generation faced a much stiffer competition for the top offices than was true of their fathers. It was natural for one of them to use the swelling popular discontent for political advancement. Furthermore, Tiberius’s motivations needed not be wholly self-serving—the great polarization of wealth, resulting in a few controlling immense fortunes while most of citizens were landless, was patently unfair.

In 133 B.C. Tiberius Gracchus was elected as the tribune of the people and immediately introduced a law designed to break up the large private estates created out of public land and distribute them among the landless citizens. This bill divided the Roman aristocracy into two factions: the populists, led by Tiberius Gracchus, and the optimates (“the best ones”), who opposed him. In many ways, the populist-optimate split mirrored the struggle of the orders between the patricians and the wealthy plebeians three centuries before.

After increasingly bitter struggle over this bill, Tiberius and 300 of his supporters were murdered by a group of optimates and their clients in the Forum. However, the land commission set up to administer the Gracchan land law continued to function after his death. During the next 6 years, it allotted land to more than 75,000 citizens, alleviating the worst of the social pressure. The next leader of the populist faction was Tiberius’s brother Gaius Gracchus, who was elected the tribune of the people in 123 and again in 122 B.C. Gaius continued to support his brother’s program of land distribution and introduced lex Frumentarium, which provided grain to the citizens of Rome at subsidized prices (and later evolved into the dole). Like his brother, Gaius was eventually brought down by his optimate enemies, and died in street fighting. With him 3,000 of his partisans were killed.
