Enserfment was a relatively late development in Russia. The right of peasants to leave their landlords was taken away by degrees during the first half of the seventeenth century. The process culminated in the Law Code of 1649, which put together the legal framework of enserfment. The economic oppression of the peasantry gradually increased, and reached its peak toward the end of the eighteenth century. Thus, there was a great difference between the free farmers of the fifteenth century, when Muscovy was a frontier society, and the unfree serfs of eighteenth-century imperial Russia, who could be sold like cattle by their owners. I should not, however, leave the reader with the impression that the location on the frontier is the only factor that determined the degree of oppression endured by the lower classes. The situation is far more complicated, and I shall return to this issue in Part II, “Imperiopathosis,” where we will see that the degree of inequality and oppression in any particular society is a dynamic variable that tends to wax and wane in centuries-long cycles.

Finally, it is important to point out that cooperation is not all “sweetness and light.” Human beings are capable both of incredible self-sacrifice and of breathtaking selfishness. Cooperation in real societies, therefore, cannot be based solely on the “Kumbayah spirit” (in the words of the political scientist Robert Putnam), and has to involve such unpleasantness as communal policing and punishment. Earlier I mentioned that if a watchman abandoned his post, he was either flogged or executed, depending on the consequences of his dereliction. Human life was as cheap in Russia as in any other premodern society, so torture and cruel and degrading punishments, such as impalement, were widespread. Although during the long struggle between Crimea and Muscovy the overwhelming majority of atrocities were committed by the Tatars against the Russians, to a large degree this was due to the asymmetry of opportunity. After a territory was annexed, certainly any rebellion against the central government was harshly suppressed. No contradiction inherently exists between cooperation and cruelty. In fact, large-scale brutality, such as genocide, could be achieved in premodern societies, and perhaps even in modern times, only by internally cohesive groups. Think, for example, about the clockwork precision of the Nazi-organized genocide against the Jews, the Gypsies, and the Serbs.
