The most important use of the regular tax income was building a permanent army. Unlike the vast and chaotic throngs of knights of the previous reign, the army of Charles the Wise had only 2,400 men at arms and 1,000 crossbowmen, of which 60 percent were mounted. These troops were permanently employed and regularly paid. The permanent forces were joined during the periods of particularly intense activity by supplementary retinues of men at arms, bringing the total to the maximum of 5,200. The first military success of the new army in the spring of 1364 was to crush the forces of the Navarrese faction in Normandy, led by Charles the Bad. In 1369, the war with the English resumed as a result of the appeal to the king by the count of Armagnac against the Black Prince. During the next decade, the French conducted systematic, if unspectacular military operations directed by such decidedly unchivalric leaders as Bertrand du Guesclin. By the end of Charles V’s reign in 1380, almost all French territory was regained. The English clung to a few towns and fortresses on the Atlantic coast and the territory immediately surrounding these strongholds. The last chevauchée (a raid in force deep into the French territory with the purpose of causing as much destruction as possible) was conducted by the English in 1380. All hostilities ceased in 1388, and were not to resume until 1411.

As DISCUSSED IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTER, the fourteenth-century state collapse in France was brought on by a combined action of popular immiseration resulting from excessive population growth, elite overproduction, and the state’s insolvency. By the end of the fourteenth century, general overpopulation had been “dealt with” by the Great Famine of 1315-22 and the Black Death from 1348 on. The bloodletting of Crécy and Poitiers, coupled with losses during the intra-elite civil wars and the popular uprisings, made inroads into the numbers of the nobility. Unfortunately, it was not enough to solve the problem of elite overproduction. There were still too many nobles around, and, moreover, their numbers were replenished by vigorous upward mobility from the ranks of commoners.
