AS A RESULT OF CONVERSION AND colonization, by the end of the thirteenth century the whole southern Baltic from Denmark and northern Germany through Poland and East Prussia to Latvia and Estonia became an integral part of Latin Christendom. This great thrust ground up and destroyed some Baltic peoples, such as the Prussians, whose very name has now been appropriated by their conquerors. Others, such as Estes and Letts, submerged for many centuries, but persisted as serfs working for their German masters, and emerged as small nations in the twentieth centuries. Finally, one people responded by consolidating its forces, and building its own great empire—the Lithuanians.

When the Sword-Brothers of Riga intruded in the territory of the future Lithuania in 1203, there were no such people as the Lithuanians. Instead, many small Baltic tribes of peasants were governed by a mounted-warrior class. Two centuries before, the Russian lands to the south and east became Christian, and these Baltic pagans found themselves on a metaethnic frontier. They endured raiding pressure from the Principality of Polotsk, and occasionally had to pay tribute. When the Kievan Russia disintegrated during the twelfth century, the Baits themselves began raiding the Polotsk lands, as well as in other directions. Chieftains with their armed retinues went on raids every spring, returning with cattle, slaves, and silver. Each tribe had a fort, where they could take refuge when the neighbors retaliated. Given low population density, dense forests, and extensive marshes, the military pressure on these Baits was not particularly high.

The situation changed dramatically with the arrival of the disciplined and rapacious knights of the Teutonic and Sword-Brother orders. During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the “proto-Lithuanians” were squeezed from the western and northern directions simultaneously. They saw their Baltic brethren annihilated or subjugated by the German juggernaut. Beginning in the 1240s, they were also assaulted from the east by the Mongols of the Golden Horde. In short, they found themselves in a metaethnic pressure cooker, where they had only two choices—consolidate or go under. The Lithuanians consolidated and founded one of the largest European empires.
