The United States is a modern country that arose as a result of torrents of immigrants entering the melting pot, so the nested nature of ethnicity is not as clear-cut here as in many more traditional societies. In many pastoral societies, by contrast, the nested, hierarchical organization is glaring. (Anthropologists call such societies “segmentary.”) The basic principle of segmentary social organization is expressed in the Arab proverb “I against my brothers; I and my brothers against my cousins; I, my brothers, and my cousins against the world.”

The Germanic peoples on the Roman frontier also had segmentary social organization. Several village communities together made up a tribe, such as the Chatti. Several tribes united into a tribal confederation, such as the Franks and the Alamanni. Finally, when the Franks constructed an empire, they united within it many Germanic tribal confederations. The presence of an imperial frontier was the key force driving this scaling up of the Germanic society. Tribes located far away from the threat and the opportunity of the Roman frontier would have little need to unite in a tribal confederation. On the Roman frontier, however, the fusion of tribes into a tribal confederation and then the amalgamation of tribal confederations into an imperial confederation was a matter of life and death.

SUMMING UP THE MANY STRANDS of argument followed in this chapter, we started with the puzzle of human ultrasociality—our ability to combine into cooperating groups consisting of millions of individuals. Two key adaptations enabled the evolution of ultrasociality. The first one was the moralist strategy: Cooperate when enough members in the group are also cooperating, and punish those who do not cooperate. A band that had enough moralists to tip its collective behavior to the cooperative equilibrium outcompeted, or even exterminated, bands that failed to cooperate. The second adaptation, the human ability to use symbolic markers for defining cooperating groups, allowed evolution of sociality to break through the limits of face-to-face interactions. The scale of human societies increased in a series of steps, from the village and clan to the tribe and tribal confederation, then to the state, empire, and civilization.
