There were also forces acting on the other end of the wealth distribution, but the reduction of the super-rich fortunes got under way only after the reign of Augustus. The fortune of Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus, consul in 14 B.C., topped those of Pompey or Crassus—he reputedly owned property worth 400 million sesterces. The scale of private fortunes declined during the first century A.D. The only exception was the fortune acquired by the freedman of emperor Claudius (A.D. 41-54), Narcissus, which was also 400 million sesterces. However, Narcissus did not live to enjoy his ill-gotten wealth—after Claudius died, Narcissus was poisoned by Agrippina (the mother of the emperor Nero).

The top of the wealth pyramid was whittled down by a variety of means. Augustus practiced a sort of a “progressive inheritance tax”—he forced the richest people of his time to include him in their wills. By this means, big chunks of private fortunes were siphoned into the state’s coffers. The second way of cutting down to size the over-mighty subjects was more direct—execution on the charges of treason, sometimes real, sometimes trumped up. The emperor Claudius condemned to death 35 senators and many knights; a substantial part of their fortunes must have gone into the imperial treasury. Nero is said to have executed six of the largest landowners in Africa Proconsularis and thus gained possession of the rich Bragadas Valley. When a number of plots against Nero proliferated (toward the end of his reign), he forced a great number of senators and knights to commit suicide, including such well-known persons as the moralist Seneca and the poet Lucan. More magnates lost their lives after the overthrow of Nero, as a result of coup-d’états during the “year of three emperors” (A.D. 69). By the reign of Vespasian (A.D. 69-79), the ranks of Roman senators had become depleted to about 200—from a peak of over 1,000 under the late Republic. In other words, the elite pruning had continued during the first century of the Principate. This trend resembles in many ways the downfall of the “over-mighty subject” under the Tudors in the early modern England.

The end result was that during the first century of the Principate the relative power of the most powerful and wealthy private individuals declined substantially with respect to that of the state. At the same time, small landholders enjoyed a period of relative economic prosperity, which was not marred by sociopolitical instability. The conflicts, described above, took the form of elite purges or palace coups, and had little effect on common people. There was only one year of civil warfare, A.D. 69, before the return of instability at the end of the second century.
