The erratic and violent behavior of the king during this episode is symptomatic of another social trend—the late medieval crime wave. Brutal and senseless bursts of violence were particularly frequent during this age. In 1358, Francesco Ordelaffi, the ruler of Forli in northern Italy, was defending his city against the besieging papal forces, when his son Ludovico begged him to yield rather than persist in a futile defense. “You are either bastard or a changeling!” roared the enraged father, drew a dagger, and stabbed his son “so that he died before the midnight.” The count of Foix killed his only legitimate son in a similar fit of ungovernable rage. In England, every other generation of feudal lords revolted against the king, but before the fourteenth century they always stopped at committing regicide. Between 1327 and 1485, however, they murdered five kings.

The wave of violence was not limited to the great lords, but affected all levels of the society. The rate of homicides per 100,000 in rural Northamptonshire tripled between 1300 and 1380. Court records preserved in the Officialty of Cerisy in Normandy indicate that there were on average 1.2 assaults per year during the first half of the fourteenth century, and only 2 percent of these involved the use of deadly weapons. By contrast, around 1400 there were 4.9 assaults per year of which 25 percent were with weapons. In the 1450s, the number of assaults was still 4.3 per year (40 percent with weapons), but by the end of the fifteenth century, the assaults fell to 0.7 per year, and only 8 percent employed deadly weapons. Scattered statistics from Italy and Germany paint the same picture. Violent crimes rose to a peak between 1350 and 1450 and subsided thereafter.

The causes of rising violence included the desperate economic situation of the peasants and disruption of the social fabric due to plague and war. However, the primary reason of the collapse of law and order was the failure of the ruling class. There were huge numbers of destitute, but armed and dangerous, nobles. Individuals fought duels or ambushed each other, and families and clans conducted multigenerational feuds. Increased levels of aggression were self-feeding. A murder was followed by revenge in a cycle of violence familiar to fans of Mafia crime stories. Moreover, frequent and brutal assaults and homicides undermined the social and psychological barriers against interpersonal violence. It was really the nobles who were the “criminal underclass” during the late Middle Ages. In fourteenth-century Gloucestershire, more than half of resident knights and esquires committed at least one felony. When the state went into financial collapse and lost the control of the army, the last remaining restraints were removed from the throngs of “noble thugs,” and the whole fabric of the society disintegrated.
