Yet, although Dawkins and others pronounced that there is just one dominant unit on which natural selection operates—the individual—in Dawkins’ own book he discusses at least three distinct units of selection. These units are the gene (which is reflected in the very title), the individual, and the group of relatives (Hamilton’s kin selection). Individuals, after all, are not unitary, structureless “atoms” (despite the name—individuum—meaning “undividable”). They are made up of organs, tissues, and cells, and each cell contains many genes. It might be in the common interest for genes to cooperate to ensure the cell’s proper functioning, but there could also be incentives for selfish genes to free-ride on this collective effort. Similarly, cells usually cooperate to promote the survival and reproduction of the organism, but at times this cooperation breaks down, and a bunch of knavish cells begins to increase at the expense of the cooperative ones. We know this as cancer. To cut a long story short, things are not quite as simple as Dawkins and other adherents of individual selection imply. In recent years, Wilson and colleagues were able to mount a successful attack on the individual-selectionist dogma. It is now becoming broadly accepted that natural selection operates at all levels simultaneously—genes, cells, organisms, groups of relatives, and simply groups.

It is true that among nonhuman organisms, under most conditions, group-level selection is quite weak. Empirical examples of group selection in nature are rare. Humans, on the other hand, are unique in the biological world in their capacity for thought, communication, and culture, and this makes group-level selection a very powerful force. The best current explanation of how human ultrasociality evolved is the theory of cultural group selection, advanced by the UCLA anthropologists Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson.

Probably the most important difference between humans and other organisms is the unique importance of cultural transmission of behaviors in humans. This is not to say that genes are unimportant in influencing the behavior of people. Studies of twins separated at birth have decisively shown that genetic makeup has a strong effect on behavioral traits, ranging from intelligence to political orientation. In the age-old debate on “nature versus nurture,” neither of the extreme positions is right; the truth lies squarely in between. Moreover, nature and nurture collaborate in determining behavior of people. Genes do not really tell people to vote Republican. Rather, certain genetic makeup can predispose people to conservative views, but whether they become card-carrying Republicans, or not, will depend very much on the family upbringing and accidental experiences throughout their life, such as reading a particular book or making a particular friend.
