From the point of view of Western Europeans, the Black Death appeared as an exogenous and inexplicable event. But Europe was not an island; it was affected by Eurasia-wide processes. In the thirteenth century, the huge core region of Eurasia was unified by the Mongol Empire of Chinggis Khan. One consequence of the Mongol conquest was an increased density and speed of traffic, trade, raids, and communications across Central Asia. The increase in traffic made it possible for the plague bacteria to survive and spread over large distances. In the 1330s and 1340s, the Mongol dynasties ruling China, Turkestan, and Persia experienced simultaneous political disintegration, throwing the great steppe into turmoil. Large numbers of people moved back and forth in a chaotic manner, and thus spread the Black Death to both ends of the continent. The plague appeared in China first (in 1331). Fifteen years later, the disease broke out among the Tatar army besieging Caffa, and from there it spread to the rest of Europe.

just as the causes of the Black Death are complex, so were its consequences. By relieving population pressure, no matter in how horrific a manner, the Black Death had a beneficial effect on the survivors. The drop of population set in motion the Malthusian machinery, but now working in reverse. When the short-term disruptive effects of the catastrophe worked themselves out, food prices declined, real wages increased, and land rents decreased. Formerly landless peasants inherited land from a deceased relative, or took over vacant farms whose owners succumbed to the plague. Landowners were suddenly confronted with a severe labor shortage, and had to drastically lower rents. In some cases, landlords were so desperate that they let land for free, simply asking that the tenant keep land productive and maintain structures on it. Shortage of labor drove wages up. In 1320, a building worker in Rouen earned 1.5 sou per day. In 1380, after the third visitation of the Black Death, he commanded a daily wage of 4 sou. The real wage in England doubled or even tripled between the beginning of the fourteenth century and the middle of the fifteenth century. Except for periods of intensive warfare, real wages and consumption levels of ordinary people improved handsomely.
