For three centuries, Austria was the Frankish march against the steppe invaders (and before that, this region was the Roman frontier province of Noricum). The centuries on the metaethnic fault line created a highly solidary nation with its own distinct identity (which is one of the reasons why Austria is still outside Germany). The rise of Austria as a great power was slow but steady. It acquired the status of an independent duchy in 1156, and in 1282 became the core of the budding Habsburg Empire. The Habsburgs acquired Carinthia and Carniola (Slovenia) in 1335 and Tirol in 1368. In 1438, they became emperors of the German (“Holy Roman”) Empire, and kept the imperial crown until the dissolution of the empire in 1806. Of course, the Holy Roman Empire was a pretty ramshackle construct, but nevertheless it gave the emperor a good deal of soft power. The big spurt of territorial expansion came in 1526, after the Ottoman Turks smashed the Hungarian army at the battle of Mohacs and conquered two thirds of the Hungarian Empire. The Habsburgs grabbed the unconquered Hungarian possessions of Croatia, Bohemia, Moravia, Slovakia, and Silesia. (Silesia was lost to Prussia in 1742.)

With the arrival of the Turks on the Hungarian plains, Austria again found itself on an intense metaethnic fault line. Vienna became a frontier fortress and was besieged by the Turks twice, in 1529 and 1683. During this period all expansion ceased and the Austrians dug themselves in, repelling one wave of Muslim invaders after another. Finally, after the second siege of Vienna the Austrians went on the offensive. The conquest of Turkish Hungary and Transylvania in 1699 doubled the Austrian territory and made it into a great power of the first rank. During the eighteenth century, Austria took over the Spanish possession in Italy and the Netherlands, participated in the partitions of Poland, and continued to expand at the expense of the Ottoman Empire.
