What is the explanation for this pattern? Putnam points to a “striking correlation between low social capital at the end of the twentieth century and slavery in the first half of the nineteenth century. The more virulent the system of slavery then, the less civic the state today. Slavery was, in fact, a social system designed to destroy social capital among the slaves and freemen. Well-established networks of reciprocity among the oppressed would have raised the risk of rebellion, and egalitarian bonds of sympathy between the slave and free would have undermined the very legitimacy of the system. After emancipation the dominant classes in the South continued to have a strong interest in inhibiting horizontal social networks. It is not happenstance that the lowest levels of community-based social capital are found where a century of plantation slavery was followed by a century of Jim Crowe politics. Inequality and social solidarity are deeply incompatible.”

It was, thus, the rise of inequality and especially of its ugliest form, slavery, that began corroding Roman asabiya during the second century B.C. If social solidarity began its decline during this period, however, it does not mean that the Roman state declined in all other ways at the same time. “Decline” is not only nonlinear, it is also multidimensional. For example, under a different measure of decline, the territorial extent of the empire, the peak was achieved under the emperor Trajan (A.D. 98-117). In other words, the territorial decline followed asabiya decline with a lag of three centuries. There is no contradiction in this. The capacity of a state to expand depends on the product of its asabiya and geopolitical resources—population numbers and the ability of economy to generate surplus. Thus, there is nothing paradoxical in the fact that territorial expansion proceeded at the same time that asabiya was declining. Furthermore, the decline of collective solidarity is an extremely lengthy process that occurs over many centuries, and it comes in spurts and stops. Asabiya is degraded by within-group competition and growing inequality (which are really two sides of the same coin), and these forces wax and wane together with the secular cycle. This is why, after the troubled period of late Republic was over, the Roman Empire was able to reconstitute itself under the Principate. It took yet another time of troubles, the calamitous third century, to kill the Roman asabiya for good. But we are running ahead of ourselves, so let’s return to tracing the social trends responsible for the Republic-Principate transition.
