Mobile phones are cheap and easy to use, and they are spreading well beyond the “golden billion.” In fact, in the poorest areas in the world, the mobile phone is the main device for long-distance communications, because telephone lines were never installed in such areas. In 2003, in the Philippines, where GDP per capita was only $4,600 (based on purchasing power parity), 1 person in 10 owned a cell phone.

Handheld multipurpose devices today are not just phones; they may also include a computer, a GPS unit, and a camera—all in a tiny fist-sized package. The technology writer and futurist Howard Rheingold writes in Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution, “They enable people to act together in new ways and in situations where collective action was not possible before.” Mobile phones “will help people coordinate actions with others around the world—and, perhaps, more importantly with people nearby.” They enable smart mobs—“people who are able to act in concert even if they don’t know one another.”

As the devices become smaller and more powerful, they turn a person wearing it into a potential TV reporter. Rheingold reports how in 2000 technology researcher and innovator Steve Mann launched “ENGwear, an experiment in wearable news-gathering systems.” In the spring of 2000, Mann together with his students, all wearing their experimental devices, went to an anti-poverty demonstration in Toronto. When violence broke out, Mann reported, “We, along with the journalists and various television crews, ran for cover. However, unlike the reporters, my students and I were still broadcasting, capturing almost by accident the entire event. Whatever we saw before us was captured and sent instantly in real time to the World Wide Web, without our conscious thought or effort.”

When the bloggers bashed CBS, the only tools they had were their analytical and communications abilities. They could not get at raw data, for which they relied on the traditional news agencies; they could only analyze them. How will our society change when bloggers begin wearing Steve Mann’s devices?

Peer-to-peer journalism (or to seem younger than I am, I should say p2p journalism) is still a matter of the future (at least as of the time of this writing, although perhaps not when this book is actually read). However, the mobile phone has already been responsible for the fall of at least one government.

As Rheingold describes: “On January 20, 2001, President Joseph Estrada of the Philippines became the first head of state in history to lose power to a smart mob. More than 1 million of Manila residents, mobilized and coordinated by waves of text messages, assembled at the site of the 1986 ‘People Power’ peaceful demonstration that had toppled the Marcos regime. Tens of thousands of Filipinos converged on Epifanio de los Santas Avenue, known as ‘Edsa,’ within an hour of the first text message volleys: ‘Go 2EDSA, Wear blck.’ Estrada fell.”
