The theories of kin selection and reciprocal altruism transformed our understanding of how animal societies evolved. But what about humans? In the 1970s, evolutionary biologists, of whom the most notable was Edward O. Wilson of Harvard University, flushed with success in understanding nonhuman sociality, decided to invade the traditional turf of social scientists and created the new science of “sociobiology.” Richard Dawkins, the author of the wildly popular and influential book The Selfish Gene proclaimed in 1976: “We are survival machines—robot vehicles blindly programmed to preserve the selfish molecules known as genes.” And it is true that kin selection, for example, helps us understand many human behaviors, such as nepotism. Kin selection and reciprocal altruism, undoubtedly, played an important role in the early phase of the evolution of human sociality. But even “primitive” human societies, like bands of hunters and gatherers, are not composed of relatives only. There are too many nonrelatives for kin selection to explain their behavior. When meat of a large animal is meticulously shared out among the band members, many recipients are very distantly related to the hunter who brought in the game, or even not related at all. At the other extreme of social complexity, when a Frenchman enlisted in the army in 1914, the vast majority of his 40 million countrymen and women had no blood relation to him whatsoever. Hamilton’s insight does not really help us understand human “ultrasociality” —extensive cooperation among large numbers of unrelated individuals. Humans, among all living creatures, appear to be unique in the extent to which they cooperate with nonrelatives.

What about reciprocal altruism? Does this help us understand how we can solve the collective-action problem involving many people? Unfortunately not, as David Hume saw in the eighteenth century: “Two neighbors agree to drain a meadow, which they possess in common; because ‘tis easy for them to know each other’s mind; and each must perceive, that the immediate consequence of his failing in his part is abandoning of the whole project. But ‘tis very difficult and indeed impossible, that a thousand persons shou’d agree in any such action; it being difficult for them to concert so complicated a design, and still more difficult for them to execute; while each seeks a pretext to free himself of the trouble and expense, and wou’d lay the whole burden on others.” Modern research using formal mathematical models confirmed this intuition. When the group size becomes large enough, cooperation among rational agents unravels as free-loading becomes rampant. The collective-action problem strikes again.
