In the fifth and sixth century, trans-Apennine Italy received another influx of free farmers, these coming from across the Alps. The largest group of immigrants was the Longobards or Lombards, as they became known in Italy. In A.D. 568, the whole Longobard nation left the Hungarian plain (which was promptly taken over by the Avars; probably it was the pressure from these steppe warriors that induced the Longobards to migrate), and invaded northern Italy. The Longobards eventually assimilated to the Romance language, but they also gave their name to the region where they settled most densely—Lombardy.

As a result of staying outside the imperial core region, and because of several influxes of relatively solidary groups of free farmers, trans-Apennine Italy did not lose all of its asabiya, and its geopolitical trajectory was different from that of the old imperial core. Peninsular Italy, including Sicily, remained an asabiya black hole from the collapse of the Roman Empire to this very day. Its fate was determined entirely by the interplay of external forces. First, it was part of the Gothic kingdom, and then it was reconquered by the Byzantium. Toward the end of the first millennium, Sicily fell into the hands of Muslims, while the area around Rome was organized as a papal state. In the eleventh century, Sicily and southern Italy were conquered by the Normans. The Norman rulers were replaced by the German Hohenzollerns, then by the French Angevins, and then by the Iberian Aragonese and Castilians. Not a single internally generated attempt at state building occurred.
