During the twentieth century, the ideas of Mandeville, Smith, and many others have been developed and systematized into what is now known as “the theory of rational choice.” The core of the theory is the postulate that people—“agents”—behave in such a way as to maximize their “utility function.” In principle, the utility function could be almost anything, but in practice almost all applications of the theory in the mainstream economics equate utility with material self-interest. In the most basic version, the utility is simply the dollar amount that an agent expects to get as a result of a certain action. The agent then should perform the action that yields the greatest payoff—this is what “maximizing utility” means. Agents that behave in ways that maximize their utility functions are “rational.”

The premise that all people are exclusively pursuing their self-interest is a parsimonious assumption with truly astonishing implications. It turns out that the price of a loaf of bread or a used Ford, the salary of a trained nurse, the interest you have to pay on your mortgage, and even divorce rates, or how many people want to get college education—a broad variety of economic and social phenomena can be adequately explained by the rational choice theory. Scientists in all disciplines prize theories that explain a large variety of facts by making the smallest possible number of assumptions, and the theory of rational choice excels at it.

There is, however, one area where the rational choice theory fails utterly-in explaining why people cooperate. Take volunteering for the army when your country is attacked. The cost—the risk of injury or death—is substantial. The benefit—preventing the defeat that might entail paying war reparations, being evicted from your home, enslaved, or even killed—is also substantial. However, the cost of enlisting you bear directly, whereas the benefit is shared equally among everybody (what economists call the public good). Your participation, or not, in the army of millions is not going to make any appreciable difference to the outcome of the war. By failing to join the army, you will reap all the benefits of victory without bearing any of the costs. According to the rational choice theory, this is precisely what a rational agent should do. Of course, if everybody behaves in this rational manner, nobody will volunteer, and the invaders will win. If nobody volunteers, however, you have even more reason not to enlist—a one-person army is certainly going to be defeated. In other words, whatever others do, it is in your interest not to enlist (to “defect”). In a society of rational agents, everybody will defect, with the end result that collective action will always fail. The economist Mancur Olson called this logical deduction the “collective-action problem.”
