As far as we can tell, the social organization of our distant evolutionary ancestors was not too different from that of the chimps. Unlike chimps, however, who enjoy eating meat but can capture only small prey, our ancestors learned how to hunt large game in the savannas of Africa. Humans eventually learned (perhaps too well) how to kill large mammals, including the largest ones such as elephants and mammoths. When they spread out of their ancestral Africa to other continents, prehistoric humans wiped out most of the large animals living there. That is why the mammoths of Siberia or giant sloths of South America are no longer with us. Unlike African species, large animals elsewhere did not co-evolve with humans and, as a result, had no defense against their predatory ways. What made primitive humans such fearsome killers? Not their teeth or claws, obviously, but their ability to hunt cooperatively.

Taking up hunting of large game exposed early humans to intense selection at the group level. Not only coordination was key to a successful hunt for large game, but moving to regions where such prey are found exposed humans to formidable predators. Only collective vigilance and cooperative defense could protect humans against saber-tooth tigers and cave bears. Again, humans got so good at dealing with these predators that they eventually exterminated them.

Even more importantly, as humans got better at hunting large game, they also got better at killing other humans. At some point, warfare (that is, any kind of organized fighting, from several chimps waylaying and killing a member of a different band to trench warfare involving millions during World War 1) became the most important force of group selection. Several kinds of evidence show that early humans practiced extensive warfare. For example, we know that interband warfare is very common among the chimps, our closest evolutionary relatives. Warfare is also nearly ubiquitous among the small-scale societies of hunter-gatherers and farmers. The anthropologist Lawrence H. Keeley presents evidence that somewhere between 20 percent and 60 percent of males in these societies die in wars. By an argument of “interpolation,” therefore, if both chimps and modern pre-state people practiced extensive warfare, so must have our human ancestors. There is also direct evidence—cave paintings depicting lines of warriors shooting at each other, defensive walls around Mesolithic settlements, arrowheads embedded in skeletons, and mass burials of fighting-age males, many of whom were killed by a blow to the head.
