The Breton identity turned out to be stonily resistant to assimilation by the French. It even survived a rather brutal attack on it by the republican French government during the nineteenth century (when children were severely punished for speaking Breton in schools). It is still alive and kicking today. Nevertheless, the March of Brittany does not qualify as a major fault line, because the Bretons and the Franks were both Christians (although Bretons practiced a somewhat different brand of Christianity). Yet the animosity between the two peoples, and the constant raiding and counter-raiding resulted in a sparsely populated gap in North France. This gap created an opportunity for a different kind of invaders to wedge themselves in—the Vikings.

Viking dragon boats first appeared off the British Isles c. 790, but did not trouble the Frankish Empire while it maintained its internal cohesion. This changed dramatically when the empire was plunged into a series of civil wars among Charlemagne’s successors. During the 840s, the Vikings established camps in the mouths of the Loire, Seine, and Somme and used these rivers as highways for raids deep into Francia. One of Charlemagne’s grandsons Charles the Bald (843-877) established the March of Neustria and appointed Robert the Strong, the count of Paris, to organize the defense against the Vikings. It became clear to the locals very soon that the crumbling Carolingian Empire, preoccupied with internecine fighting, could not spare forces for the defense of frontiers. If they wanted protection, they had to organize it themselves. This job fell to the capable and energetic counts of Paris, such as Odo, son of Robert the Strong, who in 885 led the heroic defense of Paris against the great Viking attack. The future capital of France during the ninth and tenth centuries was a frontier fortress, and from the line of Robert the Strong and Count Odo would come the Capetian kings of France.

The Scandinavians began their assault on the northwestern margins of the Carolingian Empire with raids, which soon became annual affairs. The next logical step was to establish permanent bases in the mouths of the rivers, such as the Seine and the Loire, which facilitated penetration deep into the Frankish territory. Finally, the bases began attracting land-hungry colonists from Scandinavia who came to settle and work the land. Ultimately, the colonization push into the hinterland succeeded from only one beachhead—from the mouth of the Seine. In 911, the Viking chief of Rouen, Hrolfr (Rollo to the Franks), extorted from Charles III, one of the last Carolingians, a charter granting him the lands that would eventually become Normandy. For these lands, Hrolfr did homage to Charles III, but this act was as much a legal fiction as Hrolfr’s conversion to Christianity a year later. A Frankish chronicler wrote that Hrolfr “after having been made Christian, had many captives beheaded before him in honor of the gods he worshipped.”
