Cliodynamics borrows heavily from two disciplines in the natural sciences. The focus on groups rather than individuals is akin to the approach of statistical mechanics, which integrates over motions of myriads of particles to predict such properties of the ensemble as temperature or pressure. However, the study and prediction of human groups is a much more challenging task because people vary (among other things, for example, in power and ethnic identity). Humans also possess free will. I discuss the implications of these complicating factors for the study of human societies in Chapter 12.

Cliodynamics owes an even greater debt to the discipline of nonlinear dynamics. Human societies and states can be modeled as dynamic systems, consisting of parts that interact with each other. Furthermore, states are part of an international system, which adds another level of complexity. The key concept here is dynamic feedback. A change in the state of one component of the system has an effect on another, but the change in the second might in turn affect—feedback on—the first. When a dynamic system contains within it such circular nonlinear feedback, it becomes highly susceptible to oscillation. Stated succinctly, “So peace brings warre and warre brings peace.”

Cycles exhibited by historical societies and states, however, are not the same as highly periodic, repeatable phenomena in physics, such as planetary motions or pendulum oscillation. Social systems are much more complex. It is well known from the science of nonlinear dynamics that two or more perfectly cyclic behaviors superimposed on each other may combine to produce noncyclic dynamics—in other words, chaos. Interactions between the asabiya, secular, and fathers-and-sons cycles can lead to such complex, chaotic dynamics. In a chaotic system, a small action of one of its elements—a human being exercising his or her free will—can have huge consequences. External sources also play a role—for example, variations in climate leading to crop failure, random mutations giving rise to new frightful epidemics, and cataclysmic volcano eruptions. The dynamics of real human societies cannot be accurately predicted far in the future because of the nature of chaotic behavior, free will, and natural disasters. Hari Seldon was wrong.
