The age of empires is not over—although the age of emperors may be. Even the least democratic empire, China, is governed collectively rather than by a monarch. The trajectories of two of the potential empires, the E.U. and Russia, are very hard to predict. Unfortunately, the trajectories of the U.S. and China are all too predictable. Most serious political scientists expect an escalating geopolitical competition between the two. We can only hope that this competition will take the relatively benign route of a cold war.

WHEN GHAITH ABDUL-AHAD, a reporter with the U.K. newspaper Guardian, met the Yemeni jihadi (“Islamic holy warrior”), the jihadi was praying in a room in one of Fallujah’s safe houses. It was early November 2004, during the street battles in Fallujah between coalition forces and rebels led by Abu-Musab al Zarqawi.

“The room was half-lit, the walls were bare except for one picture of Mecca. The only piece of furniture was a prayer mat in the middle of the room twisted at an angle to face the south. A Kalashnikov rifle and an ammunition pouch were laid against the wall.... On the mattress sat a man with a small Qur‘an in one hand and a set of prayer beads in the other. Sometimes his voice would be drowned out by the sounds of explosions rocking the city. As he finished his prayers he stood up, held his hands high and started praying: ‘Oh God, you who made the Prophet come out victorious in his wars against the infidels, make us come out victorious in our war against America. Oh God, defeat America and its allies everywhere. Oh God, make us worthy of your religion.’

“The man—tall, thin with a dark complexion, black eyes and a thin beard—arrived in Fallujah six weeks ago. He spent a few days sharing a room with other fighters until they were distributed among the mujahideen units in the city. He was with a group of the Tawhid and Jihad stationed in the west of Fallujah in the Jolan district where heavy fighting has been raging for the last two days.... Anxiously waiting for the Americans outside a makeshift bunker, he told his story. He said he was not here because he loved death as death but because he perceived martyrdom as the most pure way in which to worship God.”

The jihadi was a Yemeni religious student, who had been studying Islamic law for six years, while working as a minibus driver to support a pregnant wife and five children. He first tried to come to Iraq to fight the Americans in 2003, but was turned back at the airport, by the Yemeni police.
