When the game is played with university students from industrial societies, cross-cultural variation is not huge, although detectable. For example, one study found that the most frequent offer made by the American and Slovenian students was precisely half the pot, whereas in Israel and Japan the modal offer was lower, 40 percent of the pot. In Israel, there was also a substantial number of low offers (10 to 30 percent of the pot), which were very rare in the other three countries. The probability that a low offer would be rejected was highest in the United States and Slovenia, intermediate in Japan, and the lowest in Israel. Thus, lower propensity by responders to reject an unfair offer depressed the average offer amount made by proposers.

The researchers went around the world and played the ultimatum game in 15 small-scale traditional societies, which included hunter-gatherers, herders, and farmers. The amount of cross-cultural variation found in these small-scale societies was much greater than in the modernized ones (although in no society did people behave as would be predicted by the self-interest axiom). The Machiguenga of Peru made the lowest offers. Three quarters of proposals were 25 percent of the pot or less, and there was only one case of rejecting a low proposal. The Machiguenga economy is entirely focused on the household; almost no productive activity would require cooperation outside the members of the family. Same story with the Quichua of Ecuador—poorly integrated society, low offers in the ultimatum game. By contrast, the Ache of Paraguay practice widespread meat sharing and cooperation on community projects. “Aché hunters, returning home, quietly leave their kill at the edge of camp, often claiming that the hunt was fruitless; their catch is later discovered and collected by others and then meticulously shared among all in the camp.” The average proposal made by the Ache was 51 percent of the stake, almost precisely the 50:50 split predicted by fairness considerations. The Lamelara whale hunters of Indonesia go to sea in large canoes manned by a dozen or more individuals. Close cooperation is critical for a successful hunt. In the ultimatum game the Lamelara are super-fair-the average proposal was 58 percent of the stake.
