Similar to the Germans, the pre-Islamic Arab tribes had two kinds of leaders, military and religious. Different noble lineages specialized in one or the other function, but usually not both. The chiefs that ruled the Ghassanid tribal confederation on the Byzantine frontier were one example of an aristocratic warrior lineage. On the other hand, the Quraysh (to whom the future prophet of Islam Muhammad belonged) were a clan of religious leaders associated with the holy pre-Islamic shrine of Mecca. For a leader to become a powerful unifying force that would enable his followers to found an empire, he had to concentrate all forms of power—religious, military, and economic—in his hands. Both the Germanic and Arabic society eventually developed such leaders under the influence of frontier conditions. However, whereas in Germania the evolution took the route of investing the military chiefs with sacral legitimacy, in Arabia it was the religious leaders who acquired military power. The endpoint was the same, but the route taken there was culture-specific.

While the evolutionary processes slowly changed the Arab society, thus creating the conditions for their eruption from Arabia during the seventh century, the triggering event occurred during the decades around A.D. 600. During the second half of the sixth century, both the Byzantine and the Sassanian empires fell prey to secular disintegrative tendencies. Their aristocracies broke into factions, each following their own pretender for the throne. The resulting civil wars weakened both empires. To make matters worse, each empire meddled in the civil wars of the rival, adding international conflict to internal war. The whole area between Constantinople, Alexandria, and Ctesiphon (the Sassanian capital) was convulsed in a series of wars. Armies plundered their ways back and forth and cities were sacked, sometimes repeatedly. Lesser states, such as the Ghassanids and the Lakhmids, also collapsed. Starting with the great epidemic of 540, the plague carried away at least a third of the agricultural and urban population of the area (but, as far as we know, the nomadic Arabs largely escaped its effects).
