The counts of Anjou expanded their domains by skillfully playing the dynastic game. Henry II Plantagenet ( 1154-89), inherited Anjou, Touraine, and Maine from his father, and Normandy and England from his mother, the daughter of Henry I, when the latter died without male offspring. Henry married Eleanor of Aquitaine, gaining Poitou, Guyenne, and Gascony. While the French kings puttered about reducing the power of their unruly barons, castle by castle, the Plantagenet domains grew to dwarf the lands of the French crown. It might have seemed that the contest was over. Yet in the end it was the patient and systematic strategy that won the day. The main problem of the Angevin Empire of Henry II was that his ruling class was recruited from two different imperial nations, which is always an unstable situation. The Normans and the French came from the opposite sides of the metaethnic frontier, and even though they both now spoke similar dialects and professed the same religion, they thought of themselves as different and opposed groups. Much more time would have to pass before a merger would be possible. (The Normans of Normandy began to think of themselves as French in the sixteenth century at the earliest.) As a result, the configuration of the Angevin state was unstable, and it had to tip one way or another, with either the French nobility dominating, or Norman, but not both. The issue was resolved when Philip August (1180-1223) conquered all French possessions of the Plantagenets except for Guyenne.

The lasting success of the Capetian state was due to their first unifying their ethnic core, the population of North France, and only then expanding beyond it. After the core was unified, however, the subsequent expansion was rapid. Normandy and Flanders were annexed in the north, while the Albigensian crusade gained for France Languedoc in the south. During the thirteenth century, France became the hegemonic power in Europe. Its large territory and population generated a steady flow of taxes into royal coffers. Its warlike and cohesive nobility dominated the European battle-fields. And its brilliant and influential culture was admired throughout Latin Christendom.

UNLIKE THE COMPLEX HISTORY OF THE northwestern marches of Latin Christendom, the dynamics of its northeastern frontier are much easier to trace. In this respect, this frontier is more like that in Iberia, than in North France. In fact, it is remarkable how similar the German Drang nack Osten (“drive to the east”) was to the Iberian Reconquista, as we shall see.
