Although Israel is not a Christian nation, the Arabs and other Muslims perceive it as a solid part of the West and, even more narrowly, an outpost of American imperialism in the Middle East. This perception is fed by the massive economic aid to Israel, the powerful pro-Israeli lobby in the American politics, and the heavy diplomatic and symbolic assistance that Israel gets from the U.S. The invasion of Iraq by the American and British troops in 2003 further solidified Arab identification of Israel as a part of the West.

The Arabs in Palestine have, thus, been subjected to the transforming influence of a metaethnic frontier for about a century. The results are easy to see. There is now a distinct Palestinian identity, where there was none prior to the massive immigration of European Jews into Palestine. The asabiya of Palestinians has increased enormously.

During the first Arab-Israeli war of 1947-48, Palestinians were unable to cooperate effectively against the Jews. In fact, on several occasions Palestinian factions fought battles with each other. Despite their advantage of numbers, the Arabs lost the war.

Some two generations later, the situation has radically changed. In 2000, the Arabs won their first war against Israel, when the Shiite fighters of Hezbollah forced the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon. But an even more striking development is the rise of the suicide bomber. Martyrdom as the most pure way in which to worship God, using the words of the Yemeni fighter in Fallujah, has been in the cultural repertoire of Islam for centuries. So it is not surprising that the struggle of the Arabs against “Jews and Crusaders” takes this form. But the massive numbers of volunteers for suicide missions is new. It is also a phenomenon largely restricted to the Middle East. Suicide bombing elsewhere is nowhere near on the same massive scale. In the North Caucases, where Islamists have attempted to imitate the Palestinian suicide bombing campaign, they found that they do not have a source of ready volunteers, after they ran out of the “black widows,” the wives of slain mujahideen fighters. The Chechen architects of the suicide bombing campaign started using unwitting accomplices (bombs were exploded by handlers using remotes), and coerced women into “volunteering,” as the interviews with a failed suicide bomber Zarema Mujakhoeva indicate. The interviews with failed bombers in Palestine, or mujahideen fighters in Iraq, like the Yemeni interviewed by Ghaith Abdul-Ahad, indicate a very different kind of commitment (although, no doubt, some suicide bombers in Palestine were also victims of coercion).
