So how do we make sense of how and why (and when!) Rome fell? A general theory could tell us which processes are crucial to the collapse of empires, and which are incidental. In the absence of such theoretical guidance, we are at the mercy of correlations. For example, the Roman Empire adopted Christianity during the fourth century, and then collapsed in the fifth. So is there a causal relationship here? Gibbon thought so. But if that’s the case, we should expect to see the same causal connections elsewhere, and there is simply no empirical evidence supporting such a proposition. Both the Franks and the Byzantines adopted Christianity, and it only strengthened their asabiya and enabled them to expand their empires. Why should the same religion play a destructive role in one case (Rome) and a constructive role in another (Byzantium)?

Many things went on in Rome, and an aspiring theorist who wants to launch a new theory has plenty of material to pick from. Was it the Christianity? Or the decline of the “bourgeoisie,” as another historian of Rome thought? Or imperial bureaucratization? Or lead poisoning? Latching on any particular correlation in the rich history of the Roman Empire, and basing on it a grand theory that explains its collapse is easy, but ultimately unsatisfying. Dozens, perhaps even hundreds, of such theories have been proposed over the centuries. This is not the way to do science.

A good scientific theory is parsimonious, which means that it has to be very ruthless about choosing what data to use, and what to ignore. Take the theory of classical mechanics, which explains planetary motions. It could not care less that Mars is red, or Venus is blue. Or that Saturn has rings, but Mercury does not. If one wants to understand why a planet within the solar system follows any particular trajectory, one should completely ignore 99 percent of the huge mass of data the astronomers collected. To a very good approximation, all one needs to know is how far the planet is from the Sun. How do we know that the distance from the Sun is crucial, whereas a planet’s color is irrelevant? Because there is a general theory, based on Newton’s laws of motion, which tells us what kinds of data we need. If we want to have a science of history, we should proceed in exactly the same way. Of course, human societies are much more complex entities than planetary systems, and therefore we should not expect the same level of precision (nor parsimony) as achieved in celestial mechanics.
