In 2001, a team of scholars, led by former U.S. House of Representatives Speaker Newt Gingrich (who was trained as a historian), was commissioned by the Pentagon to write a report on historical empires, and make recommendations on how the U.S. could sustain its military and political predominance in the world. Fundamental issues were addressed such as whether the U.S. even was an empire; and if so, is that good or bad? And, most interestingly, the question was raised whether history offers useful lessons for America. The report concluded, “If we can take lessons from history it is this: For the U.S. to sustain its predominance it must remain militarily dominant, but it must also maintain its preeminence across other pillars of power.” Not everybody agrees. A classical scholar, Bernard Knoz, told Maureen Dowd of the New York Times, “Empires are pretty well dead; their day is gone.” The British historian Niall Fergusson, author of the 2003 book Empire, said, “The technological and economic differences between modernity and premodernity are colossal.” Finally, officials of the George W. Bush administration insist that America is not an empire.

According to my definition, an empire is a large multiethnic territorial state with complex power structure. Nobody would dispute that the U.S. is a large territorial state. As to its multiethnic composition, Chapter 2 discussed that the American melting pot had definite racial boundaries. As a result, the modern U.S. includes many minorities—Native Americans, African Americans, and Latinos, to name only three. Certain political scientists have recently argued that some large minorities, most notably the Latinos, are resistant to the assimilation of the formerly dominant WASP (White Anglo-Saxon Protestant) culture. A particularly interesting case is the Chicanos (Mexican Americans), a growing and fairly cohesive subculture. Chicanos do not consider themselves to be immigrants to the U.S., because the areas where they are numerically strong were conquered by the U.S. from Mexico in the mid-nineteenth century. Chicanos, it is claimed, have different values, stressing more the extended family and less freedom and democracy than would be the case for the mainstream U.S. culture. Such claims might be overstated, and have been vociferously disputed. Nevertheless, they serve to remind us of the limits of the melting pot metaphor—the U.S. is not a monoethnic nation, even if we discount recent immigrants.
