By A.D. 150, the social system was growing dangerously top-heavy, but it still managed to preserve its internal stability. This equilibrium was destroyed with the arrival of an epidemic that reached the Roman Empire in 165, the “Antonine plague.” The Antonine plague was probably smallpox, or a combination of measles and smallpox. Its impact on the Roman population during the first visitation of 165-9 was probably comparable to the impact of the Black Death on the European population. After the first shock, the epidemics recurred, often causing catastrophic losses, during the 170s and 180s. Another wave of epidemics hit the empire in the 250s and 260s.

Things unraveled very rapidly in the wake of the epidemic. Sensing weakness, the Germanic and Sarmatic tribes pressed across the Rhine and Danube frontiers. From 167 on, the empire was repeatedly invaded by the barbarians. The imperial finances rapidly collapsed. Marcus Aurelius was the first (but not last) emperor to sell the gold vessels and artistic treasures of the imperial palace to finance his campaigns. The main coin of the realm, denarius, was debased again and again over the next century, until its silver content fell to just 2.5 percent. Even debased currency was in short supply, and the empire lost its ability to control the legions, because it could not pay them anymore. A popular uprising flared up in Egypt, and there were hunger riots in Rome herself.

The last of the “good emperors,” Marcus Aurelius was able to hold the ruling class of the empire together for a while, but his heir Commodus (180-192) could not. (Commodus is the main villain in the very popular but historically inaccurate movie The Gladiator with Russell Crowe in the main role.) The first plot against him was hatched in 182, when a number of senators conspired with Commodus’s sister Lucilla to assassinate him. The plot failed and was followed by the execution of the conspirators and, later, a number of other senators whom Commodus suspected of treason. Commodus was then poisoned during the end-of-the-year celebration, survived the attempt (probably due to vomiting most of the poison as a result of excessive drinking), and was assassinated the next day when he was recovering in the bath. He was strangled by his wrestling partner, Narcissius, who joined the plot against Commodus. The next two emperors, Pertinax and Julianus, lasted only 87 and 66 days, respectively, and the full-blown many-sided civil war was on.
