The Arabs defeated the Byzantines and the Persians because the Arab asabiya was much greater than the asabiya of their opponents. Centuries of life squeezed between two imperial frontiers changed the Arab society in ways that made it possible for Muhammad to forge them into a unified powerful entity. By contrast, the Byzantine and Persian empires were going through decentralization phases right at the time when Muhammad was unifying the Arab tribes. For example, between 630 and 633, Persia saw seven emperors (shah-in-shahs) and one empress, none of whom managed to survive for more than half a year, and one just a few days. Success in war is a result of relative strengths of asabiyas of the opponents. A nation with high collective solidarity can lose many battles and still prevail in the end. This is what happened to the Romans during the Hannibalic wars (discussed in Chapter 6). Hannibal smashed one Roman army after another, but Rome always raised a new one. Romans lost one third of their population before they ground Hannibal up and won the war. By contrast, the Byzantines lost one major battle, and the whole of Palestine and Syria fell before the Arabs. Similarly, it took only one major defeat at Qadisiyya (637) for the Persians to surrender their capital, Ctesiphon, and all of Iraq to the Arabs.

THE WILLINGNESS TO SACRIFICE LIFE in the name of the faith has been one of the enduring strands in the history of Islam. One of the best-known examples is the Hashishim sect, which existed from the eighth century until its suppression by the Mongols. The name Hashishim (“Assassins”), actually was what their enemies called them, because they allegedly used drugs to indoctrinate sect members. Their own name for themselves was fedayeen, which in Arabic means “one who is ready to sacrifice life for the cause.” The Hashishim were opposed to the Abbasid caliphs, whom they thought to be impious usurpers. They conducted a campaign of assassination directed mainly against the Sunni Muslim rulers (but they also murdered at least one crusader king in Jerusalem). Because the Hashishim disdained the use of poison or long-range weapons, and relied on the dagger, assassination attempts usually ended in the death of the assassin; these were suicide missions. The parallels with the suicide bombings happening in the Middle East today are palpable. Earlier I cited the words of Khalid ibn al-Walid, “I lead those who love death as you love life.” Fourteen centuries later, perpetrators of terrorist acts in Palestine, Madrid, Moscow, and Baghdad have used precisely the same words.
