“The breadth of the campo proved sufficient to hide the Muslims and Christians from each other for a time. They traveled a half day’s journey from their camp and found nothing; afternoon faded into evening and brought no contact. As the darkness of night intensified, the Christians stumbled upon the Almoravid encampment, catching the settled force completely off-guard. The Muslims sounded the alarm, raced for their weapons, and a confused and fierce melee ensued. The Christians pressed the advantage of their surprise attack and cut down many opponents before they could arm themselves. In the darkness and disorder, Christian and Almoravid could barely distinguish each other. Suddenly, Prince Tashfin bursts form his field tent shouting commands in an attempt to rally his men. He was greeted by a Christian lance that pierced his thigh, transforming his determination to sudden panic. Ignoring his wound, Tashfin hobbled to the nearest horse, mounted it bareback, spurred it into action, and galloped from the scene of the struggle, disappearing into the gloom in the direction of Córdoba. The surviving Almoravids soon followed their leader’s example, retreating in confused disarray. Tashfin’s troops never recovered from their initial surprise to put up a good fight.

“Once the dust settled, the Christian militiamen looked about them at the campsite and the booty left there for the taking. They gathered all that they could carry and marched back to their camp. The raid had been extremely successful: mules, camels, gold, silver, weapons, and even Tashfin’s own battle standard were included in the spoils. The warriors of Avila and Segovia divided the booty on the spot, then began the trek back to their own towns while praising God for their fortune. They would discover that Tashfin had planned a raid against Toledo with the force they had encountered, a raid the militias had terminated. The Muslim soldiers instead straggled back to Córdoba empty-handed. Prince Tashfin ... walked with a limp for the remainder of his days.”

Although the particular way of organizing frontier warfare, municipal militia, was culture specific, this band of Castilian frontiersmen in most important ways resembled many other forces of frontiersmen, such as the Cossacks of Ermak, for instance. Neither force was a professional army. Both were cohesive self-organized units, for which no orders needed to be issued, because every man was ready to do his share. Both groups used similar religious symbols to maintain their cohesion and demarcate themselves from the enemy. Finally, both were motivated in a large degree by the prospect of the booty.
