I am not the first one to draw parallels between the Iberian Reconquista and the Russian conquest of the steppe. Several historians, including James Powers, have noted how the similarities of the frontier environment in these two societies resulted in many similar social institutions. Probably the most striking parallel is the remarkable egalitarianism and easy social mobility that characterized each society. As in Muscovy, the frontier warriors served either as cavalry or infantry. The mounted caballeros enjoyed a higher social status compared to the peones who fought on foot. They also had access to better land and pasturage, and better opportunity for booty in warfare. The peones were non-noble peasants, herdsmen, and craftsmen. However, a peon who wanted to achieve the status of caballero had numerous opportunities to do so. The most direct way, assuming he had the funds, was to purchase a horse and arms and begin serving as cavalry. Not all towns allowed for such upward mobility, so a move closer to the frontier might be necessary. A foot soldier could also move to the area where the king had a particular need for cavalry and obtain the horse and arms from the state. Finally, a foot soldier could gain the needed equipment as booty in combat. For example, a soldier who unseated a Muslim cavalryman in battle was awarded the enemy’s horse. The openness of the Castilian elites to those who were willing to provide military service persisted as long as the frontier conditions prevailed. Just as in Muscovy, when the frontier moved away, the opportunities for upward mobility dried up, and the social structure hardened.

The Castilian frontier society also had highly developed norms of fairness. This was reflected in, for example, the strict rules for the division of the profits of war. When a raiding party returned, the town council announced a day on which everyone had to bring to the town plaza whatever booty they captured. All spoils, including livestock, clothing, arms, and precious metals, were auctioned. A portion of the proceeds was used to reward acts of heroism, but the bulk was distributed to everybody who participated in the expedition, with the size of the share dependent on the equipment. (Thus, cavalrymen received greater shares than those who fought on foot.) Anybody who tried to conceal an item was punished. The system curbed self-serving behavior that could be detrimental to the collective effort—all too many battles in history were lost because soldiers were more intent on plundering the captured camp of the enemy instead of nailing down victory. By making sure that each received his fair share, this method of booty division promoted cooperation on the battlefield. Clearly, the system was designed by a bunch of moralists!
