intra-elite competition also spilled into the courts. “In 1640, there was probably more litigation per head of population going through the central courts at Westminster than at any time before or since. But one hundred years later in 1750, the common law hit what appears to have been a spectacular all-time low.” And many gentlemen took a more direct approach to settling scores with rivals. In the late sixteenth century, a veritable epidemic of dueling swept the English aristocracy. Historians traced this epidemic by counting how often duels and challenges were mentioned in newsletters and private correspondence. In the 1580s, there were only 5 such mentions, the next decade there were nearly 20, and at the peak, during the 1610s, 39. This might not represent the most accurate method for tracing social trends, but the eightfold increase in duel incidence, occurring over the span of one generation, speaks for itself.

THE SEVENTEENTH WAS ANOTHER “calamitous century,” the time of trouble comparable in many respects to the fourteenth century. All European states were affected. France went into collapse first. The civil war between the Catholics and Huguenots began in the 1560s and was raging full force during the 1580s and 1590s. After a relative quiet under Louis XIII and Richelieu, there was another state collapse during the Fronde (1648-53). The civil wars in Germany began in 1618 with the Bohemian revolt against the Habsburgs, and dragged on for 30 years (which is why this period is known as the Thirty Years’ War). The Spanish Habsburgs fought an 80-year war against the Dutch rebels, which ended in 1648 when Spain finally recognized the independence of Holland. In the 1640s, the Spanish also had to deal with simultaneous uprisings in Catalonia, Portugal, and Italy. Russia went through its own “time of troubles” (1604-13). Finally, there were two revolutions and an extended civil war in England during 1640-90.

Troubled times are not fun to live through, but they make a great setting for historical novels. One of the best adventure novels of all times (some would even say the best) is the book The Three Musketeers and its sequels by Alexandre Dumas. The main character of the novel is based on a real person, Charles de Batz-Castelmore, count d‘Artagnan, whose career started during the times of Richelieu, and ended under Louis XIV, “the Sun King.” By following the historical d’Artagnan’s career, we can obtain a glimpse of the calamitous seventeenth century from the point of view of a French nobleman.
