Violence was rampant not only between individual nobles, but also between noble factions. (This is reflected in the Dumas novel, in which the Musketeers battle it out with the cardinal’s guardsmen, in a manner of the gang warfare between the Bloods and the Crips of modern Los Angeles.) The problem was that d’Artagnan was not the only noblemen seeking to supplement his income by serving the king. There were many thousands of impoverished aristocrats in Paris, while employment opportunities could not keep pace with the growing numbers of such job seekers. As Jack Goldstone noted, “Limits on available land, civil and ecclesiastical offices, and royal patronage led to increasingly polarized factional battles between patron-client groups for available spoils.”

When one aristocratic faction won, it attempted to completely exclude its rivals. One of the notorious examples of this was the situation in England between 1617 and 1628, when the faction led by George Villiers, the duke of Buckingham, managed to monopolize the court’s patronage. In his novel, Dumas paints a fairly favorable portrait of Buckingham, but in real life this royal favorite was a pretty unsavory character who used his power to unscrupulously enrich himself and his cohorts. In the words of the historian David Loades, “The ascendancy of Buckingham transformed abuse into a scandal of systematic exploitation.”

We have already seen how declining economic fortunes of aristocrats create the climate conducive to interpersonal and interfactional conflict. It is important to stress that the purely materialistic calculation—“I lack sufficient funds to support the life style to which I am entitled by birth, and I will obtain this money by force if necessary”—is just one possible motive driving violence, and not necessarily the most powerful. The “knaves” might act on this calculation, especially if they deem that they are likely to get away with it. But for many other kinds of people, such as the moralists, the purely materialistic motive could be only a part, and a small one at that, of what drives them to become troublemakers. When an aristocratic faction, such as that led by Buckingham in the early seventeenth century, monopolizes all largesse flowing from the state, they offend not only against the pocketbook of those excluded, but also against their moral feeling. It is not fair, it is not right that a small clique is rolling in luxury while everybody else suffers. The moralistic impulse is to punish the offender. John Felton, who assassinated Buckingham in 1628, might have been a fanatic, or perhaps he was a moralist with a highly developed sense of right and wrong. When presented with glaring injustice, moralists also self-organize in action groups. Such faction formation is the usual stage before the full-blown revolution.
