General instability also affected birth rates. Women married later and had fewer children. Unwanted babies were abandoned or killed. Populations also declined as a result of emigration. Peasants ran away from harsh and grasping lords and from war-torn areas. All of the main demographic forces—mortality, natality, and emigration—were affected by heightened sociopolitical stability and acted to reduce the population.

Even more importantly, internal warfare damaged productive capacity of the society. Successful practice of agriculture requires at least a minimal degree of stability, but that is precisely what French peasants did not get during the Hundred Years of Hostilities. Some areas of France, such as Normandy, were fought over repeatedly and suffered extensive damage. A contemporary observer, the Norman bishop Thomas Basin, described the situation in northwestern France during the 1420s as “a state of devastation such that from the Loire to the Seine, and from there to the Somme, the peasants having been killed or run off, almost all fields were left for a number of years not only uncultivated, but without people ... All that could be cultivated at that time in that region was only around and inside towns or castles, close enough so that, from the top of the tower or watch-tower the eye of the lookout could perceive the attacking brigands. Then, with the sound of a bell, or horn, or some other instrument, he gave all those working in the fields or vineyards the signal to withdraw to the fortified place.”

What Basin was observing was that warfare and brigandage not only cause direct mortality and damage to agriculture, but that they also impose a kind of the “landscape of fear.” Only land near fortified places can be worked; the rest of agriculturally suitable land is abandoned.

The Paris region was another area where fighting was prolonged, and as noted previously, its rural population might have decreased fourfold! The region suffered both because it was close to Flanders and Normandy, which were the sources of the English chevauchées, and because it was the national capital, over which the Armagnac and Burgundian factions fought. The south (especially southwest) was similarly devastated. Philippe de la Boissière wrote in the fifteenth century that “this land of Saintonge, except for the towns and fortresses, was deserted and uninhabited ... Where there had once been fine manors, domains, and heritages, towering bushes grew.” Some areas escaped devastation for a while, but not for long. When the English under the Black Prince marched through the Massif Central in 1356, according to Froissart, they found “the land of Auvergne which they had never before entered ... so prosperous and so full of all manner of goods that it was a marvel to see.” Needless to say, the prosperity of Auvergne did not survive the Black Prince and his troops.
