THE SOUTHERN FRONTIER OF THE Roman Empire extended from the province of Mauritania Tingitana (modern Morocco) in the west to Palestine and Syria in the east. The location of this frontier was determined almost entirely by environmental influences. Nonirrigated agriculture in North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula requires a minimum of 25 centimeters (10 inches) of rain annually, and the Roman frontier followed almost exactly the transitional line between areas where agriculture is possible and the desert. The only exception to this rule was Egypt, where the Roman territory cut deep into the desert thanks to the Nile.

The “barbarian” people south of the frontier were the Berbers of North Africa and the Arabs of the Middle East. Incidentally, the origin of the word Berber is the same as barbarian (because to the Greeks and Romans, the incomprehensible languages of these aliens sounded like “bar-bar-bar”). During the post-Roman period, these Bedouins (from Arabic “desert dwellers”) built a number of empires, of which the most spectacular was, without any doubt, the caliphate of the Arabs. The Berbers provided the manpower for the Islamic conquest of Spain, and also founded the Fatimid, Almoravid, and Almohad empires, as well as a host of smaller states.

Chapter 3 examined agrarian societies that derived their subsistence from growing crops. But what if wealth comes not from a field of wheat, but from a factory, or a herd of camels? How does the economic infrastructure influence the character of empire building? The best authority to ask regarding the nomadic pastoralist life is Ibn Khaldun, a practical politician and a theoretical sociologist, the author of a remarkable theory of group solidarity that explained the rise and fall of states.

The concept of collective solidarity, or asabiya in Arabic, was Ibn Khaldun’s most important contribution to our understanding of human history. The theory is described in his monumental The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History. Asabiya of a group is the ability of its members to stick together, to cooperate; it allows a group to protect itself against the enemies, and to impose its will on others. A group with high asabiya will generally win when pitched against a group of lesser asabiya. Moreover, “royal authority and general dynastic power are attained only through a group and asabiya. This is because aggressive and defensive strength is obtained only through ... mutual affection and willingness to fight and die for each other.” In other words, a state can be organized only around a core group with high asabiya. By acting in a solidary fashion, the members of the core group impose their collective will on other constituents of the state and thus prevent the state from falling apart.
