The increasing difficulties for the commons underwrote another golden age of the aristocracy. Their newly won prosperity rapidly became reflected in what they wore. “In 1485, most English people, even well to do, wore similar dress,” noted the historian Ronald Berger in The Most Necessary Luxuries. “Women wore plain, loose-fitting garments, and men did likewise. Fine but simple linen was as acceptable in formal costume as ornate silk. The third and fourth decades of the sixteenth century, however, saw an explosive growth in the consumption of expensive and ornate costume. Demand rose enormously, especially among the wealthy, who purchased expensive brocades, velvets, and silks for new and splendid costumes. During the reign of Elizabeth, men changed their fashions entirely; their clothes became more elaborate and distinctive. Women matched male attire with exquisitely decorated farthingales and fine damask gowns. The sixteenth century closed with a ‘wild orgy of extravagance,’ as the provincial gentry attempted to emulate the London haute monde by wearing extravagant costumes and hats with 12-inch crowns.”

The new prosperity of the ruling classes reversed the trend to the diminution of their numbers, which predominated during the fifteenth century. In 1500, there were only 60 peers—great lords who were summoned to parliament by a personal writ from the king, and who sat in the House of the Lords. In 1640, on the eve of the English Revolution, there were 160. In 1500, there were between 5,000 and 6,000 gentry families, but in 1640 there were 18,500 of them. Whereas the population of commoners increased twofold over the 140-year period, the aristocracy increased threefold. Just as happened three centuries before, the society became top-heavy.

Because the historical record gets better as we travel toward the present, we can trace more precisely the trends of increased intra-elite competition. The historical sociologist Jack Goldstone noted in Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World that there was a great explosion in enrollments at the Oxford and Cambridge universities during the second half of the sixteenth century, which reached the peak in 1640, just on the eve of the Great Revolution. This was not because English gentlemen suddenly conceived a love of letters and learning—no, they needed a university diploma to better compete in the job market. By the middle of the eighteenth century, when the intra-elite competition for jobs greatly subsided, the enrollments at Oxford and Cambridge declined to their pre- 1600 levels. The problem was, however, that the university credentials did not guarantee a job anymore, because most of the competition also had them. As the historian Lawrence Stone wrote, “The universities were turning out an educated clergy and laity in excess of suitable job opportunities, and were thus creating a large and influential group of discontented ‘Outs’.”
