The pruning of the elites and elite aspirants, thus, was one factor in the return of stability. The second factor was the resumption of external conquests. For almost a century after the lucrative sacks of Carthage and Corinth in 146 B.C., Roman external wars brought little in terms of booty, because they were wars of defense (as against the Germanic Cimbri and Teutones) or revolt suppression (as in the interminable partisan warfare in Spain). The situation began to change during the lull between the two civil wars, with the eastern conquests of Pompey the Great in the 60s and Gallic conquests of Caesar in the 50s. When the last civil war was over in 30 B.C., expansion was resumed. The conquered territories were reorganized to yield an enormous amount of taxes. If the state revenues in late second century B.C. were on average 80 million sesterces, a century later they grew to half a billion sesterces. In other words, not only did the top of the social pyramid shrink, its supportive base simultaneously expanded.

The third important trend during the last days of the Republic was the shift in the social mood. The society was exhausted and ready to welcome a regime that restored internal peace and order. These yearnings were reflected in the contemporary literature—the poet Tibullus exclaims: “I don’t want to die young and for nothing!” Vergil’s Georgics are filled with longing for peace: “so many wars throughout the world... the fields going to waste in the farmer’s absence.” When Octavian Augustus emerged as the winner of the civil war, he found it relatively easy to impose a new political regime of the Principate. The rule of Augustus rested on a broad popular consensus. For example, when in 23 B.C. Augustus gave up the annual consulship he held since 31, the people of Rome, fearing the diminution of his authority and return of political instability, rioted trying to force him to accept the office.

The return of political stability under Augustus was accompanied by a gradual reversal of the previous trend of growing economic inequality. The basic precondition of reduced inequality was the population decline that occurred during the preceding disintegrative phase, which created space where landless peasants (mainly, veterans) could be settled. During the civil wars, Octavian simply seized land from Italian towns, and divided it among his veterans. After the end of the wars, he spent 860 million sesterces to purchase more land to settle veterans. Large numbers of landless citizens also emigrated to the provinces, further decreasing the population pressure on the resources within Italy. The government of Augustus, thus, was able to restore, to a certain degree, a class of relatively prosperous small landowners.
