To test whether this was the real reason, the researchers added a modification to the basic game. Now, after each round, the participants were told how much other group members contributed, and they could punish free-riders at a cost to themselves. For every dollar forked out by the punisher, the punished was fined three. As discussed previously, punishment cannot force rational agents to cooperate, because it is the second-order collective good. In the context of the public goods game with punishment it is downright irrational to pay out punishment dollars for no personal gain. Therefore, the self-interest hypothesis predicts that the punishment option should not change the outcome of the game in any way. Yet adding punishment completely reversed the trend to declining cooperation. As before, participants started by contributing on average a half of their endowment. But this time there was a significant amount of punishing activity directed against the free-riders, and after a few rounds the average contribution to the common pot climbed up to nearly the maximum, and stayed there to the last round.

What these experiments, and many others like them, reveal is that the society consists of several types of people. Some of them—perhaps a quarter in experiments with American students—are self-interested, rational agents—“the knaves.” These will never contribute to the common good and will choose free-riding, unless forced to do so by fines imposed on them. The opposite type, also about a quarter, are the unconditional cooperators, or “the saints.” The saints continue to contribute to the common pool, and lose money, even when it is obvious to everybody that cooperation failed (although most of them reduce the amount of their contribution). The largest group (40 to 60 percent in most experiments) is the conditional cooperators or “the moralists.” The preference of moralists is to contribute to the pot so that everybody would be better off. However, in the absence of the mechanism to punish noncontributors, free-riding proliferates, the moralists become disgusted by this opportunistic behavior and withdraw their cooperation. On the other hand, when the punishment option is available, they use it to fine the knaves. To avoid the fines, the knaves grudgingly begin contributing. Once free-riding has been eliminated, the saints and the moralists can follow their prosocial preference of contributing the maximum. The group achieves the cooperative equilibrium at which, paradoxically, the moralists do almost as well as the knaves, because they now rarely (if ever) need to spend money on fining the free-riders.
