IF WE DATE THE FIRST CLOSE encounter between the Romans and the Germans to be the conquest of Gaul by Caesar (the middle of the first century B.C.), then the frontier remained stationary and exerted its tranformative influence on the German tribes for roughly three centuries before detectable signs of the interaction emerged—large and powerful tribal confederations led by sacral kings. The Alamanni, situated along the Upper Rhine, appear in the historical record in A.D. 231, the Goths (on the Lower Danube) in 238. The first mention of the Franks (the Lower Rhine region) is in 257. Saxons east and north of the Franks are mentioned from 286. The Saxons were situated in the “second tier”—not directly on the frontier, but behind the Franks. Similarly, the Vandals (first appeared on the Middle Danube in 270) backed the Goths and the Burgundians deployed behind the Alamanni.

The appearance of these confederations coincided with (or, more likely, was triggered by) a period of political instability in the Roman Empire that followed the assassination of the emperor Severus Alexander in 235. For 50 years, internecine fighting between multiple pretenders was riving the empire apart. The period between 259 and 268 was the age of the “Thirty Tyrants” (or pretenders). The pretenders stripped the legions from the frontiers to be used in the civil war, and the German war parties poured across the frontier. The Franks raided deep into Gaul and even crossed the Pyrenees into Spain. The Goths started to raid the Balkans and Asia Minor. In 251, they wiped out the Roman army and killed the emperor Decius (not the last emperor to be killed by the Goths). Lands east of the Rhine and south of the Main were conquered and settled by the Alamanni, and the Romans had to permanently abandon the trans-Danubian province of Dacia.

In 285, Diocletian reunited the empire, and for almost a century it was able to defend its frontiers against the pressing Germans. But the arrival of the Huns on the European steppes in the mid-fourth century set in motion a chain of events that led to a battle of Adrianople (in 378) between the Romans and the Visigoths. (By this time, the Goths had broken up into two confederations, called the Visigoths and the Ostrogoths.) The Goths again defeated the Roman army, and another emperor was slain. The battle of Adrianople signaled the final decline of the Roman Empire in the West. During the fifth century, Germans overran the Latin provinces of the Roman Empire and divided them up in a number of tribal kingdoms—the Visigoths in southern Gaul and Spain, the Vandals in North Africa, the Ostrogoths in Italy, and the Burgundians in eastern Gaul.
