But it is not enough to identify group solidarity as the main factor responsible for the strength of the state. Why do some groups have it in abundance, whereas others do not? Ibn Khaldun’s theory provides an explanation. It focuses specifically on the situation in the Maghreb, but its genius lies in how well it translates across time and space.

As a result of the distribution of rainfall, which was discussed previously, the Maghreb is divided by an environmental frontier into two zones. In the north, there is a band of territory, running along the Mediterranean shore, where rain is sufficient for agriculture. This zone (which was part of the Roman Empire) is where all cities and towns of North Africa are found. It was also where all states and empires were located. Ibn Khaldun referred to it as “civilization.” South of the civilization zone lies the semi-desert and desert inhabited by the Bedouin tribes. This distinction between the “civilized” (we would now say urbanized) and Bedouin societies is absolutely crucial for the theory of Ibn Khaldun.

In the desert, each tribe can rely only on itself for survival against the harsh environment and depredations of other tribes. Ibn Khaldun stressed that “only tribes held together by asabiya can live in the desert.” A kind of natural-selection mechanism operates in the desert that eliminates any tribe that lacks internal solidarity. By contrast, cities are defended by walls against the external enemies, and internal peace is imposed by the state. As a result, unlike in the desert, no constant struggle occurs for survival within the civilization zone that would nurture and maintain high asabiya.

Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter 2, the life of a nomadic pastoralist provides a much better martial training. A shoe maker in the city who spends hours every day hunched over his work will make a lousy warrior—weak, clumsy, and nearsighted. Therefore, any Bedouin is a better warrior than your average city slicker. When you add to this individual superiority the high group solidarity of the desert dwellers, their military advantage becomes overwhelming.

The civilization zone is divided into states and empires, which are, in any case, normally quite good at defending themselves against nonstate societies. For one thing, the civilization supports much greater population densities than the desert, so the civilized armies tend to be larger than the “barbarian” ones. Civilizations also have technological advantages, such as fortifications, catapults, better arms, and armor. As long as the state keeps its internal cohesion, it is capable of defending itself against the nomads. (There are exceptions—nobody could stand against the Mongols of Chinggis Khan.) When the state loses its unity and falls into civil strife, however, it immediately becomes easy prey for Bedouins.
