Although the annexation of Kazan, followed by Astrakhan in 1556, resolved the issue of the eastern frontier, the Oka defense line provided only a temporary solution in the south. The first problem was that the defensive line passed only 50 miles south of Moscow, so any breakthrough by the steppe raiders immediately exposed the heartland to pillaging and devastation. Second, two former principalities of the Kievan Russia, Ryazan and Novgorod-Severski, which were now part of Muscovy, remained beyond the defensive line and vulnerable to the Tatar raids. The third problem, a recurrent one, was that as soon as a secure defense line was established, Russian peasants started moving into the area just in front of it (even though the authorities attempted to prevent such spontaneous colonization because they could not effectively protect these pioneers). Such population movement beyond the defensive line created many challenges for the authorities without yielding a direct profit in terms of taxes (at least, initially). However, the efforts to stem colonization were ineffective. As the population beyond the defenses increased, it attracted raiding Tatar parties, and the cry went up to protect the “Christian souls.” The government was forced to come up with resources to construct a new defensive line to the south that would protect the newly colonized territory. Upon securing the territory, government officials could count the population and assign each head of household his share of tax and service in the frontier defense forces, so ultimately the colonization movement worked to the government’s advantage. However, then the process would start again as peasants began to trickle across the new line. The result was a curiously self-propelling dynamic, in which the common people and the state collaborated (without necessarily meaning to do so) in extending the Muscovite territory south into the steppe in a series of steps. The process ended only with the final conquest of Crimea, two and a half centuries later.

WHAT WAS LIFE LIKE ON THE STEPPE FRONTIER? Documentary sources provide a good glimpse, and those sources became progressively better during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We are also lucky to have a book by Guillaume le Vasseur, Sieur de Beauplan, who spent the years 1630 to 1647 in the Ukrainian area of the frontier (which was at that time part of Poland-Lithuania). Beauplan left us with much valuable information about the adversary against whom the Russians and the Ukrainians carried out their grueling centuries-long struggle.
