The eastern empire, on the other hand, was able to withstand the barbarian pressure, although its emperors for a while fell under the sway of barbarian strongmen. Nevertheless, under the emperors Justin (518-527) and especially his son Justinian (527-565), the Byzantine Empire reconquered the majority of the western Mediterranean lands: North Africa, southern Iberia, and Italy. At the same time, Justinian was able to hold his own against the Sassanian Persia, which was trying to expand west at the expense of the Byzantines. Despite these impressive feats, religious controversy was one structural problem that plagued the late Roman Empire and eventually played the key role in its loss of African and Middle Eastern possessions.

The religious controversies centered on the two natures of Christ. The Nestorians argued that Christ had two separate natures, one human and one divine, in the same person, but not commingled. Monophysites, by contrast, claimed that Christ’s two natures were fully combined into one. Finally, the Chalcedonians maintained a middle-of-the road position that Christ was completely human and completely divine, one and the same Christ having two natures without confusion or change, division, or separation. This probably sounds like complete gibberish to many readers, and it does to me. It is hard to believe that anyone other than a handful of theologians steeped in their arcane lore could make any sense of this distinction. How could a soldier, a peasant, or a boot maker get passionate about this question? Yet, when in 457 a pro-Chalcedonian bishop was imposed on Monophysite Alexandria, the Alexandrians rioted, lynched him, and installed a Monophysite in his place.
