The post-Black Death increase of wages and decline of land rents was an unmitigated economic disaster for landowners. The worst hit were the lesser- and middle-rank landowners who relied on hired labor to farm substantial properties. As landless peasants took over the land made vacant by pestilence, the numbers of agricultural laborers shrunk, and they began demanding higher wages. The landowners responded by passing in 1351 the Statute of Laborers in an attempt to fix wages and prices and to compel able-bodied unemployed to accept work when offered. The statute was vigorously enforced, but was ultimately economically ineffective. It foundered on the free-rider problem: It was to the benefit of each individual employer that others would be limited to lower wages, so that he could attract sufficient labor by offering a slightly better wage. Because everybody felt the same way, the limits on wages quickly unraveled. Characteristically, the employers (the gentry) were not prosecuted for offering illegal wages, although many laborers were punished for accepting them. The labor legislation, in general, was the focus of much popular hatred, and its enforcement was one of the most important causes of the peasant revolts of 1381. Manorial courts increased their revenues after the Black Death, a remarkable achievement considering that the numbers of tenants had fallen drastically.

The magnates did better than the middle-rank and lesser elites, at least to 1380. The large landowners employed numerous armed retainers who intimidated peasants into accepting the high rents and low wages that prevailed before 1348. The magnates also had a longer reach, especially in counties where they had a lot of property. They could more easily locate runaway serfs and return them to their land, or punish them as an example to others. In short, they were able to use extra-economic—coercive—means to stabilize their incomes, at least temporarily. In a few cases, as on the Welsh marches, lords were even able to increase their incomes by intensifying peasant oppression. The Arundels increased their income from the lordship of Chirk in North Wales from £300 to £500 between 1320 and 1380. Henry the Bolingbroke used the occasion of his succession after the death of his father John of Gaunt to force the people of Cydweli to pay £1,575. Such unpredictable and arbitrary exactions contributed to the Welsh uprising lead by Glyn Dwr in 1400.
