The final comparison in this chapter is between the Macedonians and other Greeks. Macedon arose as a typical frontier state on the periphery of the Hellenic civilization. The Macedonians were first confronted with the nomadic Thracians, and then they were conquered by the Persians. After a brief stint as the marchland of the Persian Empire, they regained independence, and immediately came under strong pressure from the expanding Celts. These repeated blows and life on the metaethnic divide, in general, forged a strong sense of national unity among the Macedonians. When they were finally conquered by Rome, the Romans divided Macedon into four separate provinces, thus incorporating it piecemeal into the empire. The Macedonians were so incensed about this treatment that they revolted. The revolt was not about gaining independence from Rome (Macedonians realized that this was not in the cards), but they wanted to be incorporated as one unit, because the Macedonians felt they belonged together. The Romans caved in and created a single province of Macedonia.

Unlike classical Greek city-states, Macedon from its inception was a territorial state. It is a telling distinction. When the Athenians acquired the island of Salamis, they did not incorporate it into Attica (“Athenian land”). Instead, they planted some colonies of Athenians on the best land and treated the natives of Salamis as inferiors. Salamis continued to be a separate unit from Attica. The Spartans, similarly, did not expand the definition of Laconia when the conquered Messenia, but continued to call the two regions by their old names. By contrast, every time the Macedonians conquered any land, they incorporated it into Macedon. They continued doing so until Philip II, the father of Alexander the Great. Their inclusive policy provided the Macedonians with a strong base from which to begin the conquest of the known world.

WE HAVE NOW TRACED THE FATES of imperial nations in Europe from the first millennium B.C. to the first millennium A.D. At each step, we have seen that the historical record bears out the predictions of the metaethnic frontier theory. World empires arise from regions where civilizations clash. Does the pattern hold for the second millennium A.D., the world into which we were born? This is the question that is addressed in the next chapter.

Chapter 7

A Medieval Black Hole

The Rise of the Great European Powers on Carolingian Marches
