So what can the theories that we discussed in this book tell us about the dynamics of the world’s current hegemonic empire? As we have seen, what makes empires function are the qualities of their core nations, of which the most important is asabiya. American asabiya might be on a decline, if recent trends in social capital are good indicators, but the U.S. still has an abundance when compared to other large contemporary countries. The response of the American nation to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 is clear evidence that the U.S. is highly capable of collective action. Most tellingly, there was no attempt by the mainstream opposition party, the Democrats, to use the events of 9/11 and the subsequent course of military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq as a means of political infighting against the ruling Republicans, even though the Bush administration arguably committed a number of grave errors.

The obverse side of internal cohesion, in fact one of the important factors sustaining it, is the “us versus them” mentality. Observers of current American politics, especially those from outside the U.S. (from where such matters are easier to see), have commented frequently on what they often characterize as the nationalistic, even xenophobic, strain in America, which has become particularly apparent in the post-9/11 era, but was discernible even before. The British journalist and writer Anatol Lieven, now at Washington’s Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, recently argued that American patriotism has two faces. The first is the “American Creed,” a civic ideology that espouses liberty, democracy, and the rule of law. A powerful integrative ideology with elements of messianism has always been extremely important in the success of world empires. The Byzantines had their Orthodox Christianity, the Arabs had Islam, the French had la mission civilisatrice, and the Soviets had Marxism-Leninism. The American Creed impels its adherents to extend the Western values and Western democracy to the whole of the world. Much is admirable in this ideology, but there is also a dark side. Many nations (not just their rulers, but the population at large), most notably in the Muslim world (but not only there), do not desire to be “civilized” in this way. They have their own culture and traditions and would prefer to be in control over which elements of Western civilization they adopt and integrate into their own, and which they reject.
