To give an analogy in sociology, consider suicide, one of the most drastic and personal decisions that a person can make. The fact that people kill themselves, to me is the ultimate proof that the free will exists. Yet at the macro level, the annual numbers of suicide in a large country is a highly predictable statistic. This year’s number will be very similar to the last ones. Moreover, at times of social stress, the suicide rates go up in a predictable way. Other factors also affect this property of a society, and they provided the basis for Suicide, a classic study by one of the founders of modern sociology, Emile Durkheim (1857-1917).

Here’s then an example of how an exercise of free choice at the micro level can have a vanishingly small effect at the macro level. But at least a person contemplating suicide can affect the statistics of suicide rate by one death. There are many structural situations in social life in which even such a tiny effect is denied us.

I live in Connecticut, a state where during the 2004 elections John Kerry was projected to win over George Bush by 10 percent. Such a large gap meant that Kerry victory was a foregone conclusion. Certainly both the Democratic and Republican campaigns treated it this way—both spent hardly any money on political advertising in Connecticut. When I got up on that second Tuesday of November 2004, the exercise of my free will—whether I would vote for Bush, Kerry, or Ralph Nader, or simply would not vote at all—was completely irrelevant to the final outcome. The effect of my single vote was not simply tiny, it was exactly nil. Kerry would get his 7 electoral votes, not 7.00001 nor 6.99999, no matter what I did. When a dynamical system dampens out small perturbations, we call it stable. The electoral process in Connecticut was stable to small perturbations such as my vote, so the only “rational” action for me would be to skip voting that day. (I voted anyway—think of it as exercising my free will.)
