The press that the nobility exerted on the commoners was declining not only because there were relatively fewer landlords per peasant, but also because nobles were forced to adjust their consumption levels to match their diminished incomes. Gone were the opulence and conspicuous consumption of the High Middle Ages. The royal courts of the late fifteenth century were small and drab affairs. Louis X (1461-83) of France was a man of simple, even bourgeois, habits. In England, the first Tudor, Henry VII (1485-1509), was a tight purse. What a contrast between the courts of these two kings and those of Francis I and Henry VIII during the next century! The cultural change is evident in the arts. Portraits of that time show that somber gowns were in, ostentation out. In architecture, there is a change from a flamboyant style of late Gothic to the elegant and simple Renaissance.

BY THE LATE 1420s, the severe pruning of the nobility abated the social pressures that had fueled the intra-elite competition and conflict. At the same time, after two decades of civil war and foreign invasions, everybody, from the magnate to the peasant, was heartily sick of chaos and unending turmoil and wanted stability at almost any cost. The problem was that the position of Charles VII was so weak after the disaster of Verneuil (1424) that for a while it was not even clear around whom the forces for order could consolidate. Charles was not even formally invested with the French crown (he could not get to Reims, which was in the English hands), and he was reduced to holding his court at a provincial town of Bourges (hence the disparaging nickname the roi de Bourges). In an incredible development, making one think that societies can act almost like living organisms, in 1428 France produced Jeanne d’Arc. The lifting of the siege of Orléans by Jeanne followed by the coronation Charles VII in Reims in 1429 was the turning point. The conclusion of a treaty with the duke of Burgundy (1435) brought the civil war to an end, and the French reconquest slowly gathered steam. Paris was recovered in 1436, Gascony (except Bordeaux and Bayonne) was reconqured in 1442, Normandy in 1450, and finally Bordeaux fell in 1453.

The decade after 1435 saw a permanent establishment of state finance in France, essentially along the lines hammered out in 1360. By 1460, the restored fiscal system was producing 1.8 million livres a year. Solid fiscal foundation was a factor of critical importance in ending the Hundred Years’ War, but it itself was a consequence of the new-found feeling of national unity among the elites, which was widely shared by the lower classes, as the dynastic conflict between the Valois and Plantagentes became gradually transmuted into a national war of liberation against the English.
