THE LAST TWO CHAPTERS SURVEYED all large states within a defined area (Europe and the Mediterranean) during a defined period of time (the first millennium A.D.). We found that the empirical generalization, proposed in Chapter 2, that future empires are born in areas where the frontiers of the empires of yore coincide with civilizational fault lines is supported by empirical evidence. In fact, the hypothesis works very well—on the European frontier of Rome, where the situation is particularly clear-cut, all large states originated within a narrow band of the frontier zone (that is, from less than 7 percent of the total of the area of Europe). No large states were born either in the interior of the Roman Empire, or in the nonimperial hinterland of northern and eastern Europe. We obtain the same result when we examine the southern—desert—frontier. Clearly such a striking pattern could not happen by chance alone.

Here then a powerful general principle of world history is uncovered: A close connection exists between fault-line frontiers and new, expansionist states. However, what about the specific mechanism that I proposed to account for this empirical generalization—the role of frontier in nurturing high degree of cooperation, or asabiya, to use Ibn Khaldun’s term? This explanation runs counter to the “received wisdom” of social science in the twentieth century, when the main current was to downplay the importance of cooperation and altruism while putting on the pedestal self-interested, “rational” motives of behavior. Influential thinkers, such as Carrol Quigley in his The Evolution of Civilizations: An Introduction to Historical Analysis, or Joseph Tainter in The Collapse of Complex Societies, contemptuously dismissed theories, such as Ibn Khaldun’s, as “the softening of the fiber” or “mystical” explanations. The majority of social scientists perceived cooperation and collective solidarity as somehow “soft” and unscientific, while (and this was particularly true for the economists) extolling the virtues of the “rational-choice theory” that explained the collective behaviors of human masses by assuming that all people behave in a purely self-interested manner.

If the prevailing wisdom is correct, and theories explaining historical processes by postulating an important role for solidarity and cooperation are without scientific merit, we need to look for the explanation of the relationship between frontiers and empires elsewhere. However, the prevailing paradigm has been recently challenged in such a vigorous way that it is crumbling right before our eyes. We are in the process of a major scientific revolution, which will ensure that the social science of the twenty-first century will differ significantly from that of the last century. The next chapter reviews some of these recent developments that allow us finally to put cooperation on a firm scientific basis.

Chapter 5

The Myth of Self- Interest

And the Science of Cooperation
