In 1219, there were about 20 Lithuanian princes. Forty years later, one of them, Mindaugas, had mobilized the entire population to fight for him, the nobles as cavalry, the peasants as infantry. This first attempt at unification foundered, and in 1263 Mindaugas was murdered by his own brother-in-law. But the pressure from the Teutonic Order continued, and when it intensified in the early fourteenth century, another unifier arose. Under Gediminas ( 1316-41 ), Lithuania began expanding into the land of former Kievan Rus, which were at that time under tribute to the Golden Horde. The expansion continued under the next grand duke, Algirdas ( 1341-77), and Lithuania reached to the Black Sea. The next grand duke, Jogaila (1377-1434), married Jadwiga of Poland. During the fifteenth century, Lithuania-Poland became the largest territorial state in Europe. In 1410, Jogaila defeated the Teutonic Order in a great battle of Grünwald, and in 1466 the Teutonic Order was finally brought to heel. It became a vassal of the Polish crown, and henceforth half of its membership was to be Polish. This triumph of a Slavic-Baltic state over the German crusading order is undoubtedly one of the most spectacular turnarounds in human history. But no triumph is permanent in history. At the end of the eighteenth century, the Hohenzollern kings of Prussia, who started as the vassals of the Polish crown, were busily carving up Poland, squabbling over choice cuts with their fellow predators, the Habsburgs and Romanovs.

To the end of the fourteenth century, Lithuanians remained pagan, because paganism was an inalienable element of their national identity, based as it was on the opposition to the Latin Christianity of the German crusaders. However, after the German threat subsided, the Lithuanians found that they could now dispense with their paganism. Jogaila accepted baptism in 1386 as part of the deal in which he acquired the Polish crown. There was some initial resistance to Christianity, but during the fifteenth century the Lithuanians gradually converted. They were the last European people to become Christian.
