THE THREE FRONTIERS DISCUSSED IN this chapter were, in a way, local affairs. Their dynamics were affected by events that occurred, at most, a few hundred kilometers away. The southeastern march of the Latin Christendom, by contrast, responded to pulses that originated many thousands of miles away, on the other side of Eurasia. There, on the interface between Mongolia and northern China, lay arguably the world’s greatest metaethnic fault line, “the Mother of all Clashes of Civilizations” (with apologies to Saddam Hussein and Samuel Huntington). This Inner Asian frontier formed during the first millennium B.C. and was responsible for repeated state formation in China across the ages. On the steppe side of the frontier, three great imperial nations were born—the Hsiung-Nu, the Turks, and the Mongols. Each of these nomadic nations built a huge Eurasian empire, subjugating some steppe peoples, and thrusting others out. A nomadic nation, coming under pressure from the powerful neighbor in the east, would gather its fighting men, women, children, and herds and shift westward, putting pressure on the next people down the line, in a kind of a domino effect. As a result, the repeated empire-building pulsations on the frontier with China generated waves of pressure traveling westward across the great steppe. The last stop was the westernmost extension of the Eurasian steppe, the plains of Hungary

The first nomadic wave from Inner Asia to reach the Hungarian plain were the Huns, who are thought to be the descendants of the Hsiung-Nu. At the very least, they took their name from that imperial nation. (Hsiung-Nu is the modern reading of the Chinese characters; in ancient times the name was probably pronounced something like “Hunnu.”) The next wave, the Avars, was an offshoot of the Turkic Empire. The Avars were followed by the Magyars. The last nomadic invasion, the Mongol tumens under Batu Khan, wiped out the Hungarian army in 1241, but then left, because Batu wanted to participate in the election of the next great khan, and had to prepare for a trip of several thousand miles to the east.

Every time the Hungarian plain was inundated by the nomadic people from Inner Asia, the area on the Middle Danube just to the west (modern Austria sans Tirol) found itself in a very tough neighborhood. This was the region where the southeastern march of Latin Christendom was located. The march dates to the Carolingian times. In 788, Charlemagne deposed Duke Tassilo and incorporated Bavaria into the Frankish Empire. The future Austria was at the time within the Avar Empire. In a series of campaigns over the next eight years, the Franks destroyed the power of the Avars and established the East March (Ostmark in German, which was later changed to Osterreich, Latinized to Austria). Austria became predominantly German as a result of colonization from Bavaria.
