We know the main events of Muhammad’s life—divine revelation (in A.D. 610), emigration to Medina (622), the struggle with the Meccans and their capitulation (630), and the subjugation of the tribes of the Arabian peninsula just before Muhammad’s death (632). But how did he manage to forge the tribes into an Islamic “meta-tribe”? The answer appears to lie in the nature of Muhammad’s religious message. The old polytheistic religion of the Arabs was an integrative force only at the level of a tribe, but could not serve as the basis for a confederation of all tribes. Accepting the religion of any particular tribe would mean for the rest to subjugate themselves to the aristocracy of the lucky tribe, something that freedom-loving nomads were extremely reluctant to do. Not that the tribesmen were particularly interested in proselytizing their brand of religion. After all, one of the main functions that it served was to distinguish “us” from “them.” Islam, by contrast, was a new, monotheistic, and proselytizing religion. Converting to Islam meant submitting to God, rather than any particular earthly ruler. In fact, most flavors of Islam to this day retain their aversion to “kings.” Because Islam was a monotheistic religion, submitting to a single God automatically united all Muslims into a single state with a single army. Finally, Islam welcomed converts from all tribes (and even from non-Arabs). It did not matter which tribe the convert belonged to, all were now brothers under a universal, unique God. An important part of Muhammad’s message was that all Muslims belonged to one closely knit community, the umma. No one was excluded from the umma for reasons of social status or tribal origin. The universality of Islam marked a radical break with traditions of pre-Islamic pagan cults, and was crucial to its ultimate success.

The umma concept had a powerful grip on individual believers. Leaving umma was much more difficult than abandoning a tribal confederation put together for whatever materialistic reasons. Breaking with the Muslim community was apostasy. Not only was a Muslim required to kill an apostate, but the apostate also damned his or her very soul to burn in hell.
