The rise of suicide bombing is not due to some sort of fanaticism supposedly inherent in Islam. The Arab societies in the vicinity of Israel have been transformed by a century-long exposure to the metaethnic frontier. Militant organizations such as the Hezbollah or Hamas are a direct result of the frontier pressures. As the interview with the Yemeni fighter shows, not all jihad warriors are driven by the thirst for death—the portrayal of Islam as a religion of death is misleading. The Yemeni did not want to die; he wanted to go back home to see his newly born daughter. But a more powerful motive compelled him to fight the Americans. So strong was his thirst for justice, that he was willing to sacrifice his life. The Yemeni was a moralistic punisher, if a rather extreme version of the type.

The occupation of Iraq by the U.S. and allied forces expanded the zone of direct contact/conflict between the Western and Islamic metaethnic communities. It is now Americans who have to deal with Islamic martyrs, homegrown in Iraq as well as flocking from all over the Muslim world. Was the invasion wise? The theory—the American Creed—is that bringing democracy and the rule of law to the Middle East will transform the Arab societies there and place them on the road to freedom and prosperity. It might work.

The metaethnic frontier theory, however, predicts that the Western intrusion will eventually generate a counter-response, possibly in the form of a new theocratic caliphate, because that is the traditional way in which Islamic societies have responded to challenges from other civilizations. Such a response is not going to happen next year. Last time the West intruded in the Middle East was during the Age of Crusades. Two centuries passed from the First Crusade, which arrived in the Holy Land in 1099, to the rise of Saladin’s Ayyubid dynasty in 1174. The Crusaders were expelled from their last stronghold of Acre in 1291.

On the other hand, the Western pressure on the Islamic societies of the Middle East dates at least to the occupation of Egypt by the British troops in 1882. The establishment of Israel in 1948 merely elevated it to new heights, and the second Iraq war increased the pressure to what might be an unbearable pitch for the Arabs. It is possible that the world changed so much from the days of Ibn Khaldun that his law of asabiya does not operate any longer. But is it wise to bet on it?
