The blogosphere encompasses the whole political spectrum, but the bloggers on the right had long charged that Rather was biased in favor of Democrats. Some bloggers noted that the memos were suspiciously well formatted—something that we expect now in the age of word processors and laser printers, but not the way a document produced on a typewriter in the 1970s is likely to look. After a frenetic keyboard-clacking debate, a consensus emerged in the blogosphere that the documents must be fakes. Within a week of the original broadcast, Dan Rather and CBS were in retreat. They were forced to admit that they were too eager to accept the documents as genuine and retracted the story. Dan Rather retired. The blogosphere demonstrated its power, no doubt not for the last time.

Myriad unpaid activists acting without any central direction were able to humble a mighty multi-billion-dollar corporation. It was a victory of heterarchy over hierarchy. A heterarchy is a kind of network structure, in which no discernible centers of control are apparent. Information flows back and forth between the nodes, rather than solely from the center. The blogosphere is a heterarchical structure; its host, the World Wide Web is, too; so, too, is Al Qaida.

The problem for social theorists is that it is much easier to understand and model hierarchies. Linear cause-effect relationships are easy to make sense of. In heterarchies, nonlinear feedbacks reign. What one node does might affect other nodes, thus changing what they do, and in turn affecting the original node where the signal originated. As a result, heterarchical networks behave in highly complex ways, and are difficult to predict. Emergence (or not) of consensus is one example of such a complex self-organizing behavior. Other examples include the mysterious synchrony achieved by fireflies that flash in unison by the thousands, rhythmic synchronized clapping by European audiences at music concerts, and coalescence of global terrorist networks. Our understanding of the dynamics of heterarchical networks is in its infancy.

ALTHOUGH THE RISE OF THE World Wide Web, and the various phenomena that it made possible (such as the blogosphere), is a striking sign of how the world is changing, the Internet is still the province of a minority of the world’s population. The blogosphere provides an integrative technological matrix only for the wealthier and more intellectual segment of the world population, the information-savvy elites who are comfortable with reading, evaluating, and writing. The device that will probably have the greatest impact on social dynamics is the mobile phone.
