In summary, demographic forces—death and birth rates—were gradually reducing noble numbers. Patterns of social mobility worked in the same direction. Above I have already mentioned that during the fifteenth century ennoblements fell from 20 to 6 per year. At the same time, rates of downward mobility increased. During the first half of the fifteenth century, the noble incomes continued on the downward spiral that began in the fourteenth century. Even during peaceful times, landlords suffered from the unfavorable (to them) economic trends of high wages, low rents, and depressed grain prices. The periods of warfare brought complete ruin to them. An example of a more extreme collapse is provided by the seigneury of Sully (in the Orléans region), whose revenue between 1383 and 1455 fell from 700 to 143 livres! Data from other regions suggest less-extreme but still substantial declines of revenues. In war-torn Normandy income declines between 1400 and 1450 were on the order of 50 percent.

The severe depression of landed incomes did not affect all noble families uniformly. Rather, it imposed a selection regime in which the weak and unlucky declined and eventually succumbed, whereas the strong and lucky held their own, or even got ahead. The impoverished nobles who attempted to maintain the levels of consumption necessary for preserving their status rapidly ran up debt, and eventually had to sell their lands. Thus, the majority of the lesser gentry, those families with 25-50 livres per year, who already were on the brink by 1350, were plunged beyond the point of no return. On the other hand, many magnate families during this period were buying up lands. It was easier for a great lord to reduce consumption without crossing the line between nobility and commonality. Furthermore, magnates were better positioned to profit from the royal patronage (even though the total flow of royal favors was greatly diminished during this era due to the persistent insolvency of the crown), and land was cheap.
