Jack could seek employment elsewhere, and that’s what hundreds of thousands of rural Englishmen were doing at that time. During the thirteenth century, the population of London increased from 30,000 to 80,000. An unskilled worker, such as a mason’s helper, could earn a penny per day, assuming work was available. They were paid only for the days they worked, and given that there were many religious holidays when no work was done, unskilled workers could hardly earn more than a pound a year. Most of this salary would go to pay for food, the rest for dwellings (unheated in winter, because wood was very expensive in the cities). Poor people could not afford to buy new clothes, but there were many secondhand clothing dealers. There was no question of starting a family.

A skilled worker made three pence per day, or close to two pounds sterling per year. This salary allowed him to support a family, although life in big cities was so unhealthy that few children survived to maturity.

THE SPECIFIC TRAJECTORIES OF THE Atwoods and the Harcombs are hypothetical, but the wealth stratification in the English villages c. 1300 was very real. Around 3 percent of villagers were wealthy like Matthew. Twenty percent were substantial peasants (with 30 acres of land) who enjoyed a cash surplus in a normal year. Another 30 percent had just enough land (15 acres) to balance on the edge of survival. And half of peasants did not have even that.

Interestingly enough, the Matthew effect also was at work among the aristocracy. The wealthiest Englishman in the early fourteenth century was Thomas, earl of Lancaster. His annual income was £11,000—5,000 times greater than that of a skilled mason! Furthermore, the huge fortunes, such as the earl’s, were a comparative novelty in England. A hundred years earlier, the largest income in England was enjoyed by Roger de Lacy, constable of Chester. It was only £800 per year. Very few lords at that time had incomes exceeding £500. Around A.D. 1300, however, six earls (including Lancaster) had annual incomes of more than £3,000. Sure there was inflation during the thirteenth century, but even taking it into account the incomes of the richest nobles increased manifold compared to a century earlier. At the same time, the inflation ate into the incomes of the middling sorts. Two generations before, masons were also paid 3 pence per day, but this money then bought more bread than at the overpopulation peak of the cycle. And skilled masons were not badly off. (They constituted the middle class of medieval England, such as it was.) There were many more destitute folk in England of 1300 than a century before. Thus, the poor became poorer, while the rich grew richer.
