I ran various versions of my model. (Different inheritance rules and other tweaks affected the results.) I came to believe that I understood how inequality arises in the model. But any model is a simplified description of reality. Is this one a good description? Does it really capture some essential features of the real world? We need to see how the dynamics, postulated by the model, work in some real historical society. Fortunately, as a result of decades of excellent research by the historians of medieval England, we have enough information for this particular society to enable our testing of the model.

It is possible to trace the hypothetical trajectories of two peasant families—call them the Atwoods and the Harcombs—across three generations during the second half of the thirteenth century. The families themselves are imaginary, but the data on various economic aspects of their life is real. This is another kind of modeling, in which we use data to set the boundary conditions within which the model trajectory can develop. Both the Atwoods and the Harcombs start with 30 acres of land (the great-grandfather generation), but the Atwoods consistently have two heirs, whereas the Harcombs produce only one in each generation.

SOMETIME IN THE SECOND HALF OF the thirteenth century, Jack Atwood’s grandfather inherited half of his father’s land, 15 acres. According to the calculations of economic historians, this was just sufficient to feed his family, even after paying off the priest, the lord, and the king. Grandfather Atwood would be considered as a middling sort in his village, neither rich nor poor. During bad years, he would have to borrow to make ends meet, but then he would be able to repay his debts during good years. When he died, the land was divided between his two sons, Jack Atwood’s father and uncle.

Seven and half acres was not enough to feed the family, and Jack’s father had to supplement his income from the crops by hiring out to help with plowing and harvesting. Each spring, the Atwoods bought several piglets, raised them during summer, and sold them for bacon in the fall. Jack’s mother made some additional pennies by spinning wool. In good years, the Atwoods just managed to make the ends meet, and perhaps in really good years they could even afford to eat one of their pigs at Christmas. But there were also bad years, when Jack’s father fell behind on the dues he owed to the tithe and tax collectors.
