As a young scion of the prominent family, Ibn Khaldun was expected to enter the government service, which he did at the age of 20. However, instead of working for the ruler of his native Tunis, he moved to Fez and took up service with Sultan Abu Inan, the head of the Marinid State of Morocco. Unfortunately, in 1357, Abu Inan became suspicious of Ibn Khaldun’s loyalty and threw him into prison, from which he was freed only a year and half later, when Abu Inan died. Ibn Khaldun served the next Marinid sultan for a while, and then emigrated to Granada, which was the last Muslim principality left in Spain at that time. In 1364, he was put in charge of the diplomatic mission sent to Pedro the Cruel of Castile. The king was so impressed with the Tunisian that he offered to take Ibn Khaldun in his service and restore his ancestral property in Seville, but the philosopher turned him down. In 1365, Ibn Khaldun is back in the Maghreb, serving as prime minister in the court of Abu Abdallah, the new Hafsid ruler of Bougie. The next decade North Africa was torn apart as a result of conflict between the Marinids and Hafsids, and it is a miracle that Ibn Khaldun survived. When Abu Abdallah fell, Ibn Khaldun raised a large force of the desert Arabs and entered the service of the sultan of Tlemcen. However, a few years later, Tlemcen was also conquered by the Marinids, and Ibn Khaldun was captured by the forces of the new Marinid Sultan Abd-al-Aziz. Fortunately, this time he spent only a night in captivity, and was allowed to retire to a monastery.

After many further vicissitudes and turns of fortune, Ibn Khaldun left the Maghreb on pilgrimage to Mecca. By that time, his fame as a scholar was widespread, so when he was passing through Cairo, the ruler of Egypt offered him a chief justice position, which Ibn Khaldun accepted. He lived most of the rest of his life in Cairo, except for some travel to complete the Hajj, and trips to Jerusalem and other cities in Palestine and Syria. In 1400, he was in Damascus when the city was placed under siege by the Central Asian empire builder Timur (Tamerlane). Timur was eager to meet with Ibn Khaldun, the famous thinker who understood the inner workings of societies. Ibn Khaldun was soon lowered in a large basket from the wall of the besieged city. He spent seven weeks in Timur’s camp, where he gave a series of lectures on the theory of history to the famous tyrant.
