One of the first things that Louis XIV did after assuming the reins of government was to rid himself of one of his over-mighty subjects. The superintendent of finance, Nicolas Fouquet, had accumulated a fortune evaluated at 15.4 million livres—a far cry from Mazarin‘s, but nothing to sneer at. Fouquet made a mistake by throwing a great party at his opulent Chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte to which he invited the king. The palace and the party were so magnificent that they outdid the king’s. (This was before Versailles was built.) In his Memoirs, Louis XIV wrote about Fouquet: “The sight of the vast establishment that that man built, and the insolent acquisitions that he had made, could only convince me of the unbounded level of his ambition; and the general calamity of all my people solicited constantly my justice against him.” Two weeks after the party, Louis summoned d’Artagnan (whose services he inherited after Mazarin’s death) and ordered Fouquet’s arrest. d’Artagnan had the distasteful duty of guarding Fouquet for the next four years, until the latter was tried, stripped of his wealth, and sentenced to life imprisonment.

During the reign of Louis XIV, the excesses of government officials were gradually brought under control. The wealth of the chief minister of Louis XIV, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, was estimated at between 5 and 6 million. The minister of war, Louvois, gained a fortune of some 8 million in a career spanning 20 years (1672-91). In the early eighteenth century, the fortunes of ministers declined even further. As the finance and taxation historian Richard Bonney noted, “After 1720, ministerial gains from office were small beer indeed compared to the situation before 1661.” At the same time that the high-end fortunes were disappearing, noble poverty also declined, primarily by means of forcing impoverished nobles out of the second estate into the third. For example, in 1640, two thirds of noble families in rural Normandy had incomes of less than 1,000 livres. By 1700, this proportion declined to 40 percent, and half a century later only 10-15 percent of the nobles were in such impoverished conditions.
