The millions of inhabitants of the Italian Peninsula outnumbered the invaders by orders of magnitude—modern historians estimate that most of these barbarian nations numbered in tens of thousands, and even the largest hordes could not have much more than a hundred thousand people. Yet they could move through Italy at will, sacking Rome on numerous occasions—all of this without eliciting any collective response from the population. The only reason that Italy enjoyed a relatively prosperous period during the fourth century, it seems, was the imposition of peace and order by the authority, located outside the asabiya black hole that developed in the core of the Roman state—the eastern Roman Empire based in Constantinople. But even the rulers of the western half of the empire abandoned Rome, and moved their headquarters closer to the frontier. Within Italy, the center of gravity shifted from Rome north to Milan and then to Ravenna. This development reflects an important difference between the northern (trans-Apennine) and peninsular Italies, a difference that has persisted to the modern days.

The northern segment of the Apennine Mountains, which separate the peninsula from the Po Valley, was a metaethnic frontier between the Mediterranean civilization and the Celtic “barbarism” during the first millennium B.C. After Rome won its centuries-long struggle against the Gauls, the peninsula and Sicily became the core region of the Roman Empire. It was within this region where the ruling class had its country villas; it was here that slave plantations displaced freeholds, and where all the major slave uprisings raged during the late Republic. Trans-Apennine Italy (or Cisalpine Gaul, as it was known during the Republic) developed on a diverging trajectory. When the Romans conquered this region, they ethnically cleansed the majority of its Gallic inhabitants, and encouraged colonization by small-scale farmers. As far as we know, the large slave plantations never spread into the trans-Apennine Italy. Even as late as A.D.100, according to Pliny the Younger, slave agricultural labor was not used in the Po Valley. Thus, trans-Apennine Italy did not experience the corrosive effects of the most extreme form of inequality, slavery. The western emperors moved their capital to this region probably because its population retained a certain degree of social solidarity, unlike the imperial core region south of the Apennines.
