New waves of settlers from Scandinavia arrived during the tenth century, and Normandy was expanded in the western, southern, and eastern directions. The Norman expansion exerted an enormous pressure on the surrounding people. The Bretons, who fought so effectively against the Carolingians, collapsed, and their chieftains escaped across the channel. The Norse war bands continued plundering the Frankish lands. A Frankish chronicler wrote that in 924, “Rögnvald with his Norsemen ... depopulated Hugh’s [count of Paris] land between the Loire and the Seine.” Another band “devastated the land across the Seine.” The Normans themselves were very well aware of the amount of devastation they visited on the Frankish lands, and how much hatred their raids inspired, as the following story shows. When Norse chieftains rebelled against William Longsword (Hrolfr’s son and successor in Rouen), William contemplated taking his personal war band with him and fleeing to the Franks. His chief supporter Bernard the Dane demurred, “We will hasten with you as far as the river Epte [the border of Normandy with Francia], but truly we will not go into Francia. For in the past we often raided there with your father, and we cut down many once fighting had begun. Indeed we either killed or took captive the grandfathers and maternal uncles, the fathers and paternal uncles, the maternal aunts and paternal aunts, the cousins and brothers of those living there. And how we hope to survive in the face of such enemies?” As the historian Eleanor Searle noted in her book Predatory Kinship and the Creation of Norman Power, 840-1066, the Normans thought of their relationship with the Franks in terms of a blood feud.

DURING THE NINTH AND TENTH CENTURIES, Norse raiding and the establishment of Normandy created a metaethnic frontier in North France. It was remarkably similar to the Roman frontier of half a millennium before, but on a smaller scale. On one side was a Romance-speaking Christian culture with at least some literacy among the elites (mainly, the ecclesiastical ones). On the other side were the “barbarian” Germanic Odin worshippers. Even after A.D. 1000, when the Normans assimilated to the Romance language and Christian religion, they retained a fierce self identification as Normans, separate from, indeed hostile to, the Franks.
