The collapse of order brings in its wake the four horsemen of the apocalypse—famine, war, pestilence, and death. Population declines and wages increase, while rents decrease. As incomes of commoners recover, the fortunes of the upper classes hit bottom. Economic distress of the elites and lack of effective government feed the continuing internecine wars. However, civil wars thin the ranks of the elites. Some die in factional fighting, others succumb to feuds with neighbors, and many simply stop trying to maintain their aristocratic status and quietly slip into the ranks of commoners. Intra-elite competition subsides, allowing the restoration of order. Stability and internal peace bring prosperity, and another cycle begins. As a sixteenth-century commentator put it, “So peace brings warre and warre brings peace.”

The typical period of a complete cycle, which consists of a benign integrative phase and the troubled disintegrative phase, is around two or three centuries. I call these majestic oscillations in demographic, economic, and social structures of agrarian societies secular cycles. The demographic-structural theory that explains secular cycles is developed in Chapters 8 and 9, in which it is illustrated with French and English history during the medieval and early modern times.

The phase of a secular cycle affects a trend in economic and social inequality, which in turn affects the dynamics of asabiya. Incipient imperial nations are relatively egalitarian. Great differences in wealth among group members undermine cooperation, and such groups succumb to rivals with higher levels of asabiya. In addition, metaethnic frontiers tend to be underpopulated, so there is enough land (the main form of wealth in agrarian societies) for all who are willing to work it. The success of an imperial nation at territorial expansion, however, results in the movement of frontiers far away from its core, thus removing an important force holding up the growth of inequality Imposition of peace results in population growth, and overpopulation brings with it the impoverishment of peasant masses. As the poor grow poorer, the rich grow richer—this process is called the Matthew principle. The growing disparity between the rich and the poor puts the social consensus under strain. At the same time, the gap in the distribution of wealth grows not only between the aristocrats and commoners, but also within each social group. Intra-elite competition for diminishing resources results in faction and undermines national solidarity. During the disintegrative phase of the secular cycle, regional and sectarian identities acquire greater saliency than the national or empire-wide identity, and the asabiya of the imperial nation is corroded. Thus, the Matthew principle plays an important role in imperiopathosis, the decline of empires.
